COMPREHENSION SKILL
Directions (Q.Nos. 1-104) Read the following passages carefully and answer the questions that follow.
PASSAGE 1
As society becomes more and more affluent, people
would prefer to work shorter hours at their regular
employment so that they may enjoy longer hours of
leisure during which they can indulge in more
congenial activities. They will not like to waste
their leisure time performing routine domestic
chores, which tend to sap their energy. The idea of
a robot slave which would be capable of performing
many of these monotonous chores is one that will
appeal to many. Already robots are used in mines
and factories to perform tasks which are too risky
for human beings. It takes a lot of research by
dedicated scientists and sufficient financial backing
for a model to be developed to perform a new task.
This in turn depends on the number of people who
feel the need for a robot to perform these specific
tasks.
The problem of designing a robot capable of
performing various routine tasks around the house
is not insurmountable. A domestic robot slave with
its own computer and response mechanism and
source of power, which can be programmed to
perform certain specific tasks, is not an
impossibility.
1. In an affluent society, people prefer to work
shorter hours because
(a) they are lazy
(b) they do not have the strength to work
(c) they want time to carry out other activities
(d) they abhor their work
2. Domestic chores
(a) are welcome by housewives
(b) are too demanding
(c) lead to family discord
(d) are too time consuming
3. Robots are already used in mines and factories to
perform
(a) hazardous tasks
(b) tasks with greater efficiency than human beings
(c) tasks which lead to economy in the operations
(d) tasks which are forbidden by the labour laws
4. Developing a robot capable of performing a new
task
(a) is difficult for the scientists
(b) is impossible for the scientists
(c) requires huge capital
(d) depends on the number of people who require it
PASSAGE 2
The energy crisis has been with us for a long time and
will be with us even longer. Whether Arab oil flows freely
or not, it is clear that the world industry cannot be
allowed to depend on so fragile a base. The supply of oil
can be shut off at whim any time. In any case, the oil
wells will run dry in about 30 years. New sources of
energy must be found and this will take time. But it is
not likely to restore that sense of copious energy
availability we had in the past.
5. In the writer's opinion, the energy crisis
(a) is an outcome of unregulated supply of oil to industries
(b) will subside as soon as the Arab oil begins to flow
again
(c) is very likely to lead to the world war
(d) will remain with us for an almost indefinite period of
time
6. The phrase 'so fragile a base' refers to the
(a) current energy crisis in the world
(b) uncertainty about the flow of Arab oil
(c) delay in finding the new energy sources
(d) drying up of the oil wells in future
7. The type of writing in the given passage could be called
(a) official (b) scientific (c) popular (d) political
PASSAGE 3
All who have gone before you have submitted to the stroke
of death. All who come after you shall undergo the same
fate. The great and the good, the prince and the peasant,
the renowned and the obscure travel alike the road which
leads to the grave.
At the moment when you expire, thousands throughout
the world shall with you, be yielding up their breath. Can
that be held to be a great calamity which is common to
you with everything that lives on the Earth, which is an
event as much according to the course of the nature, as it
is that leaves shall fall in autumn or that fruit should
drop from the tree when it is fully ripe.
8. Death is a natural phenomenon because
(a) the moment you die, thousands of people all over the
world die with you
(b) it is as natural as the fall of leaves or fruits from the
trees
(c) many people have died in the past
(d) the great and the good, the prince and the peasant, the
renowned and the obscure, all die

550
CDS Pathfinder
50. The way to perform the vigil was
(a) to chant mystic numbers
(b) to go to the plains or the plateaus
(c) to fast and wait alone
(d) to make it last as long as possible
PASSAGE 16
An 11 year boy walking behind his parents and a
pet dog off England's highest cliffs, which rise to
230 m at their peak, blown off in a gale to a
height of at least 170 m. The gale drowned out the
boy's screams while his parents walked on ahead.
They realised what had happened only when the
dog barked furiously at a helicopter flying in the
sky. The pilot of the helicopter displayed
exemplary presence of mind and picked up the boy
from the cliff to the great relief of his parents who
found him alive and kicking.
51. The parents did not hear the boy scream
because
(a) they were far away
(b) of the sound of the gale
(c) of the drone of the helicopter
(d) of the barking of the dog
52. The gale struck the boy while he was
(a) jumping off the cliff
(b) playing with the dog
(c) looking at the helicopter
(d) walking behind his parents
53. The parents discovered the mishap only when
they
(a) saw the helicopter rescuing the boy
(b) heard the dog barking furiously
(c) realised the fury of the gale
(d) noticed the destruction of plants and trees
PASSAGE 17
The dabbawallahas are partly a by-product of
Mumbai's overcrowding. There was a time when
many men could get home to take their lunch, but
those more comfortable days ended as the city
grew. But the conservatism of married men being
well known, they still wanted home-made lunch.
An Indian loves his lunch as much as anybody
and feels that only his wife can guarantee the
quality, quantity he requires, that restaurant food
is expensive, of poorer quality and is served in
meagre portions.
54. According to the author, the dabbawallahas
(a) are responsible for the overcrowding of Mumbai
(b) often create a lot of problems for the city
(c) have come mostly from rural areas
(d) came into existence as a consequence of
Mumbai's overcrowding
55. The past was more comfortable for the people of Mumbai
because
(a) many of them were rich and could afford good food
(b) they could bring home-made food for lunch
(c) many of them could go home to lunch
(d) they could eat their lunch outside
56. Which of the following best describes the author's
attitude to the dabbawallahas?
(a) objective
(c) appreciative
(b) enthusiastic
(d) critical
PASSAGE 18
Birds which spend the summer in the higher reaches of
mountains come down during the winter to the lower
foothills or even the plains. This is very common in India
where the mighty Himalayas lie close to the Indo-Gangetic
plain. Birds are punctual too unless they are delayed by
bad weather. We may calculate almost to a day when we
may expect our bird friends to return, carrying winter on
their backs. Some birds make the long journey in easy
stages, stopping to rest on the way. Others fly great
distances without pausing to rest and feed. Some fly by
day, some both by day and by night, but most of them
speed on their way through darkness after the Sun has set.
57. During the winter, common birds in India
(a) move higher towards the mountain
(b) come down to the foothills
(c) travel in the night
(d) remain where they had been staying
58. Birds sometime get delayed in their migration because
(a) they have to take rest and feed
(b) they lack the sense of time
(c) of bad weather
(d) they lose the sense of direction
59. Mostly the birds make their long journey
(a) during the day time
(c) at midnight
(b) at sunrise
(d) in the darkness
PASSAGE 19
The real reason why I should not like to be in the book
trade for life is that while I was in it I lost my love of
books. A bookseller has to tell lies about books and that
gives him a distaste for them; still worse is the fact that he
lies constantly dusting them and hauling them to and fro.
There was a time when I really loved books-loved the sight
and smell and feel of them, I mean, at least if they were
fifty or more years old. Nothing pleased me quite so much
as to buy a whole lot of them for a few rupees at an
auction.
60. The author lost his love of books
(a) by not reading books for a long time
(b) by being in the book trade for a long time
(c) as he could not get good books to read
(d) as he was prevented from owning and reading books

GENERAL ENGLISH > Comprehension
555
QUESTIONS FROM
CDS EXAM (2012-2016)
2012 (1)
PASSAGE 1
Our voyage was very prosperous, but I shall not
trouble the reader with a journal of it. The captain
called in at one or two ports and sent in his
long-boat for provisions and fresh water, but I
never went out of the ship till we came into the
Downs, which was on the 3rd day of June, 1706,
about nine months after my escape. I offered to
leave my goods in security for payment of my
freight, but the captain protested he would not
receive one farthing.
We took kind leave of each other, and I made him
promise that he would come to see me at my house
in Redriff. I hired a house and a guide for five
shillings which I borrowed from the captain.
1. When the writer uses the word 'prosperous' to
describe the voyage, he means that
(a) it made him rich
(b) it made him healthy
(c) it was very pleasant
(d) it was uneventful
2. On the voyage, the author
(a) left the ship at intervals
(b) was not able to leave the ship because it did not
stop
(c) never left the ship at all
(d) never left the ship till they came into the Downs
3. In the context of the passage, the word
'provisions' means
(a) mainly food
(b) mainly security
(c) money
(d) mainly ammunition
4. For the payment of the author's freight, the
captain
(a) kept his goods as security
(b) refused to accept any money
(c) protested against being paid only a farthing
(d) accepted a sum of money
5. From the passage, it is clear that the captain's
attitude to the author was
(a) one of hostility
(b) one of indifference
(c) one of extreme friendliness and kindness
(d) one of disgust and irritation
PASSAGE 2
What were the early ideas of men about the sky and the
Earth? They naturally believed that the Earth was
motionless, and they also supposed that it was flat. These
two ideas do not surprise us. Children now-a-days think the
same until they are taught differently. How were men to
know that the Earth was a ball circling round the Sun?
They had no telescope for accurate observation. They had
nor travelled round the world. In fact many parts of the
world in those days were unexplored and unknown. They
lived on a kind of flat plate, and that the sky with the Sun
and the Moon and the stars, was a kind of inverted bowl
turning round above them. The Sun, the Moon and the stars
were their lamps for day and night.
6. Unless children are taught differently they think that
(a) the Earth is round and moving
(b) the Sun and the Moon are motionless
(c) the Sun and the Moon are moving
(d) the Sun and the Moon are moving round the Earth
7. The early ideas of man were wrong because
(a) man did not use the telescope
(b) man did not like to travel
(c) man never had the scientific knowledge
(d) man was foolish and lazy
8. What was true for the early man?
(a) The Earth was round and moving
(b) The telescope was accurate
(c) Travelling and exploring were the methods to gain
knowledge
(d) The Sun was motionless
9. What was the main cause of the early man's wrong
ideas?
(a) Lack of scientific knowledge
(b) Seeing and believing
(c) Lack of desire to know
(d) Lack of desire to observe and explore
PASSAGE 3
The man sat-up in the snow for a moment and struggled
for calmness. Then, he pulled on his gloves by means of his
teeth and got upon his feet. He glanced down at first in
order to assure himself that he was really standing up, for
the absence of sensation in his feet left him unrelated to
the Earth. His erect position in itself started to drive the
webs of suspicion from the dog's mind and when he spoke
peremptorily, with the sound of whip-lashes in his voice,
the dog rendered its customary allegiance and came to
him.

560
CDS Pathfinder
PASSAGE 16
Many poor farmers had been compelled to take up indigo
cultivation, when the British settlers were given the
right to purchase and cultivate land in India. Many
whites, therefore, either acquired land or advanced loans
to poor farmers and pressurised them to forsake the
farming of foodgrains and other cash crops for indigo
cultivation. Indigo export to Europe was lucrative for the
British settlers who held a monopoly of this business.
Within a few years, most of the fertile lands had
undergone forcible indigo cultivation, resulting in a
famine situation in Bengal. When the farmers declined to
cultivate indigo, they were tortured, jailed and even
killed.
51. The poor farmers in Bengal took up indigo cultivation
because
(a) the government encouraged them to do so
(b) it was a money earning crop
(c) they were forced to do so
(d) this was the only crop that would grow in that region
52. British settlers bought land in Bengal in order to
(a) introduce cultivation of cash crops in India
(b) cultivate indigo
(c) settle down in India
(d) promote export business in Bengal
53. Indigo export was profitable for the British settlers
because
(a) they had no competitors
(b) the crop yield was good
(c) they could oppress the farmers
(d) the labour was cheap
PASSAGE 17
The first day out we met our first rhino, two of them
and I had the fright of my life. The pair had our scent
before we spotted them and being bad tempered beasts,
they rushed towards where they thought we were. Now
it just happened that we were about fifty yards to one
side of where they expected to find us-which was just as
well, for I must say I did not like their look. As they
thundered past, we crouched low and let them go. It did
not strike me as a good opportunity for rhino
photography. Anyhow, I was much too frightened to have
been able to hold the camera steady.
54. From the above passage, it appears that rhinos
(a) run away when they see human beings
(b) rush to attack when they smell human scent
(c) hide under the bushes at the sight of human beings
(d) stand still if they are not attacked
55. When the author saw a rhino for the first time, he was
(a) excited
(c) charmed
(b) frightened
(d) surprised
56. The author could not take the photographs of the
rhinos because
(a) he was too far away from rhinos
(b) he was not carrying a good camera
(c) it did not occur to him that he had a chance to do so
(d) he did not like the look of rhinos
2013 (II)
PASSAGE 18
A well-dressed young man entered a big textile shop
one evening. He was able to draw the attention of the
salesmen who thought him rich and likely to make
heavy purchases. He was shown the superior varieties
of suit lengths and sarees. But after casually
examining them, he kept moving to the next section,
where readymade goods were being sold and further
on to the hosiery section. By then, the salesmen had
begun to doubt his intentions and drew the attention
of the manager.
The manager asked him what exactly he wanted and
he replied that he wanted courteous treatment. He
explained that he had come to the same shop in
casual dress that morning and drawn little attention.
His pride was hurt and he wanted to assert himself.
He had come in good dress only to get decent
treatment, not for getting any textiles. He left
without making any purchase.
57. The young man was well-dressed because
(a) it was his habit to dress well
(b) it was his wedding day
(c) he wanted to meet the manager of the shop
(d) he wanted to impress the salesmen
58. The salesmen in the shop are described as people
who pay attention to
(a) only young men and women
(b) pretty women
(c) only rich customers
(d) regular customers
59. The young man moved away to the hosiery section
because he
(a) was not interested in purchasing anything now
(b) did not like the readymade clothes
(c) wanted better clothes
(d) was restless
60. The manager asked the young man what he
wanted because
(a) he would give him exactly what he was looking for
(b) the salesman had drawn his attention to the
indifferent attitude of the young man
(c) he thought they could do more business with him
that way
(d) he thought the visitor was dissatisfied

GENERAL ENGLISH > Comprehension
565
103. In the context of the passage, what does
'regression' mean?
(a) Lack of desire to improve the reading speed
(b) Looking back at what is already read
(c) Lack of proper understanding of what one
reads
(d) Comparing the reading speed of school and
university students
104. In order to be a good reader
(a) regress whenever necessary
(b) be like a careful driver
you
should
(c) not look back frequently while reading
(d) test your vocabulary frequently
105. According to the author reading with regression
is like
(a) driving with poor quality brakes
(b) stepping backwards while walking
(c) using several brakes in order to slow down
(d) making sudden spurts in reading speed
PASSAGE 31
Even in the most primitive societies the great
majority of people satisfy a large part of their
material needs by exchanging goods and services.
Very few people indeed can make for themselves.
everything they need-all their food, their clothes,
their housing, their tools. Ever since men started
living in communities, they have been satisfying
their needs by means of specialisation and
exchange, increasingly each individual has
concentrated on what he can do best and has
produced more of the special goods or services in
which he has concentrated, than he can consume
himself. The surplus he has exchanged with other
members of the community, acquiring, in exchange
the things he needs that others have produced.
106. Very few people can satisfy their needs today
by
(a) providing things for themselves
(b) exchanging goods and services
(c) concentrating on what they can do best
(d) individual specialisation
107. Exchange of goods becomes possible only when
(a) there is no specialisation
(b) goods are produced in surplus
(c) primitive societies become modern
(d) individuals make things for themselves
108. Specialisation and exchange began when men
started
(a) big industries
(b) concentrating on their work
(c) producing things for individual use
(d) living in communities
109. Exchange of goods and services becomes necessary
because
(a) man is a social being
(b) reciprocity is the law of life
(c) trade and commerce are means of progress
(d) we cannot produce everything we need ourselves
PASSAGE 32
Soil scientists have shown that the soil teems with millions
of living things, many of them useful, others harmful. The
living things which are useful include earthworms and
various kinds of bacteria. Earthworms loosen the soil and so
enable air and water to enter it. Bacteria, which are
microscopic living things breakdown dead plants and
animals and make humus, or take nitrogen from the air
and change it into substances that plants use.
The living things that do harm include other bacteria and
fungi which cause diseases. Other harmful things are pests
such as wire worms which feed on the roots of grass and
other plants. While the farmer can usually keep weeds in
check by careful cultivation, this alone may not protect his
crops from insects, pests and diseases. Now-a-days,
however, he is much better able to control these enemies.
He may plant specially resistant types of seeds or he may
keep the pests and diseases in check with chemicals. With
better seeds farmers have been able to increase their crop
yields. They can grow crops that ripen more quickly and
have a stronger resistance to disease, frost or drought.
110. Scientists who study soil believe that
(a) all insects and bacteria are harmful
(b) only microscopic living things are useful
(c) only earthworms are useful
(d) not all worms and bacteria are harmful
111. The living things that do harm
(a) break down plants and animals
(b) use up the nitrogen from the air
(c) cause diseases in the plants
(d) loosen up the soil from air and water
112. Farmers are always careful
(a) to control insects and fungi that attack plants
(b) to encourage pests in the soil
(c) to eliminate all bacteria from the soil
(d) to foster all kinds of worms in the earth
113. Now-a-days, it is possible to reduce the loss caused by
pests and harmful bacteria
(a) with the use of chemical fertilizers
(b) through the development of resistant seeds
(c) by using weeds as killers
(d) by controlling earthworms
114. The farmers today can also select seeds
(a) of slow ripening variety
(b) resistant to frost and drought
(c) for economy in costs
(d) of lower resistance to disease

570
CDS Pathfinder
163. The man could not buy the handkerchiefs because
(a) he did not like the handkerchiefs
(b) his friend did not allow him to buy them
(c) the shop did not have any handkerchiefs
(d) he had no money in the purse
164. When he tried to take out the purse, he discovered
that
(a) it was not there
(c) it was a new purse
(b) it was lost
(d) it was his friend's purse
PASSAGE 44
A profound terror, increased still by the darkness, the
silence and his waking images, froze his heart within
him. He almost felt his hair stand on end, when by
straining his eyes to their utmost, he perceived
through the shadows two faint yellow lights. At first,
he attributed these lights to the reflection of his own
pupils, but soon the vivid brilliance of the night aided
him gradually to distinguish the objects around him in
the cave, and he beheld a huge animal lying but two
steps from him.
165. The opening of the passage suggests that
(a) darkness, silence and waking images added to his
already being in profound terror
(b) a profound terror increased the waking images in his
frozen heart
(c) the person was frightened by darkness and silence
(d) a profound terror was caused in him by the silence
and darkness of the night
166. When he perceived through the shadows two faint
lights,
(a) he experienced a great strain
he felt his hair stand upright
his eyes felt strained to their utmost
(d) his pupils dilated
167. The person in the story
(a) imagined that he saw an animal
(b) could not recognise the animal
(c) saw the animal by chance
(d) expected to see the animal
PASSAGE 45
We are tempted to assume that technological progress
is real progress and that material success is the
criterion of civilisation. If the Eastern people become
fascinated by machines and techniques and use them,
as Western nations do, to build huge industrial
organisations and large military establishments, they
will get involved in power politics and drift into the
danger of death. Scientific and technological civilisation
brings great opportunities and great rewards, but also
great risks and temptations. Science and technology
are neither good nor bad. They are not to be tabooed
but tamed and assigned their proper place. They
become dangerous only if they become idols.
168. According to the author, people think that real
progress lies in
(a) material success and technological growth
(b) imitating Western nations
(c) having large industries and political power
(d) taking risks and facing temptations
169. According to the author, science and technology
should be
(a) tabooed and eliminated from life
(b) used in a controlled and careful manner
(c) encouraged and liberally used
(d) made compulsory in education
170. From the passage, one gathers that the Eastern
people must
(a) appreciate scientific achievements
(b) build huge industrial organisations
(c) avoid being controlled by machines and techniques
of industrial production
(d) be fascinated by machines
171. According to the author, science and technology are
(a) totally harmless
(b) extremely dangerous
(c) to be treated as idols
(d) useful, if they are not worshipped blindly
PASSAGE 46
It is not luck but labour that makes men. Luck, says
an American writer, is ever waiting for something to
turn up; labour with keen eyes and strong will always
turns up something. Luck lies in bed and wishes the
postman would bring him news of a legacy; labour
turns out at six and with busy pen and ringing
hammer lays the foundation of competence. Luck
whines, labour watches. Luck relies on chance; labour
on character. Luck slips downwards to self-indulgence;
labour strides upwards and aspires to independence.
The conviction, therefore, is extending that diligence is
the mother of good luck; in other words, that a man's
success in life will be proportionate to his efforts, to his
industry, to his attention to small things.
172. Which one of the following statements sums up the
meaning of the passage?
(a) Luck waits without exertion but labour exerts without
waiting
(b) Luck waits and complains without working while
labour achieves success although it complains
(c) Luck often ends in defeat but labour produces luck
(d) Luck is self-indulgent but labour is selfless
173. Which one of the following statements is true about
the passage?
(a) Luck is necessary for success
(b) Success depends on hard work and attention to
details
(c) Expectation of good luck always meets with
disappointment
(d) Success is exactly proportionate to hard work only

GENERAL ENGLISH > Comprehension
575
73. (d) The writer was against shooting
the elephant because he felt it would
amount to avoidable waste of useful
property.
74. (b) The author compares the elephant
to a costly machine because it can do
as much work as an expensive
machine.
75. (a) The elephant looked no more
dangerous than a cow because it was
quietly doing its work.
76. (b) The author was very fond of the
old soldier as he used to tell him
about his adventures.
77. (d) The soldier repeatedly tells that he
walked two hundred miles because he
emphasised that he was a strong
soldier.
escape
78. (d) The author mentions in the third
line of the passage that he liked the
story of soldier's
from a
Japanese prison-of-war camp.
79. (b) The old soldier, according to the
author, was satisfied with his lot.
80. (c) The soldier's leg had to be
amputated because his wounded toe
turned septic.
81. (c) That the organisers had a difficult
time because the meeting could not be
started on time.
82. (c) The word 'assuaging' means to
reduce.
83. (c) Further delay resulted in the
people making noise.
84. (c) The educational system which
caused fear in the second mind was
based on punishment.
85. (a) System based on rewards did not
satisfy the slow pupil.
86. (b) System based on marks appealed
to the competitive spirit in the pupils.
87. (c) Man's movement is obstructed in a
jungle.
88. (d) Movements of other beings helps
snakes to receive advance warning.
89. (a) Option (a) is the correct choice.
In this context, 'bearing' means 'effect'.
90. (a) There is a close relationship
between ambition and activity.
91. (c) It means that ambition must be
consistent with one's capacity.
92. (a) The underlying tone of the
passage is that one must do everything
as well as one can.
93. (b) One should not imagine oneself
always to be better than others.
94. (d) The early instruments for
measuring earthquakes were not
sensitive enough.
95. (a) Because earthquake comes like
a thief in the night.
96. (d) To record the facts with a pen
and
paper.
97. (c) The tendency of a standing
person to fall when a bus or train
moves.
98. (b) It was presumed that at the
time of earthquake, the pen that we
use to write on a paper should stay
still and the paper should move.
99. (b) The author first played cricket
when he was a school boy.
100. (a) "Felt my inherent foreignness"
means 'feeling strange'.
101. (c) Spectators would shout "Butter
Fingers" when the author was
playing because the ball slipped
from his hands and dropped.
102. (b) 'Spectator' means a person
watching an event i.e., an onlooker.
103. (b) Regression' means looking back
every now and then at what is
already read.
104. (c) In order to be a good reader
you should not look back
frequently while reading.
105. (b) The author mentions in the
fourth line of the
passage that
reading with regression is like
stepping backwards while walking.
106. (a) Very few people can satisfy
their needs today by providing
things for themselves.
107. (b) Exchange of goods becomes
possible only when goods are
produced in surplus.
108. (d) Specialisation and exchange
began when men started living in
communities.
109. (d) Exchange of goods and services
becomes necessary because we
cannot produce everything we need
ourselves.
110. (d) Soil scientists believe that not
all worms and bacteria are harmful.
111. (c) The living things that do harm
cause diseases in the plants.
112. (a) Farmers are always careful to
control insects, fungi and bacteria
that attack plants.
113. (b) Now-a-days, it is possible to
reduce the loss caused by pests and
harmful bacteria with resistant types
of seeds.
114. (b) The farmers today can also select
seeds resistant to frost and drought.
115. (d) The noise was made by the boy.
116. (c) 'Fast asleep old man' suggests
that he was least disturbed.
117. (b) Everybody was waiting for
something.
118. (b) The little man was most bored
because he was turning the pages of
the magazine nervously.
119. (b) The man was troubled as the
blacksmiths' hammers made a lot of
noise.
120. (d) Money was given to the
blacksmiths to find new huts for
themselves.
121. (c) The man wanted to know why
the blacksmiths hadn't found new
huts.
122. (b) The man came to know that the
blacksmiths had exchanged their
huts.
123. (d) As per the author, there was a
possibility of the tigress covering the
distance within the half hour.
124. (c) The path to the camp was not
suitable for walking as it ran
through heavy jungle.
125. (d) The author found it difficult to
decide the question as there was
uncertainty about the reaction of the
tigress to his call.
126. (a) Shooting was possible during the
daylight, hence option (a) is suitable
here.
127. (c) When the author said 'all would
be well', he meant that they would
be able to shoot her down without
difficulty.
128. (b) The flat did not really suit him
any more as he was living on his
own now.
129. (a) He did not look after the rest of
the flat as he did not use it.
130. (d) Here, 'it' refers to 'the flat'.
131. (c) From the passage, we learn that
the writer was satisfied with the
space in his bedroom.