INDIAN ECONOMY
The Economy section is one of the most important sections of the CDS examination. Around 8-10 questions
are asked from this section every year. Topics from this section include Basic Economic concepts, Banking
system, Share market, Inflation and Deflation, Foreign exchanges and reserves, Some important financial
institutions, Important economic indices etc.
INTRODUCTION OF INDIAN
ECONOMY
Indian economy is primarily an agricultural economy with
major emphasis on service sector. Two-third of Indian people
earn their living directly or indirectly through agriculture.
Indian economy is the 7th largest economy in the world
measured by nominal GDP and the 3rd largest by Purchasing
Power Parity (PPP).
Main characteristics of Indian economy are as follows
i. Agrarian Economy In an Agrarian economy,
agriculture dominates in both the Gross National
Product (GNP) and employment. More than half of
India's working population is engaged in agriculture.
ii. Mixed Economy It is an economy where both public
and private sector co-exist. The nature of Indian
economy is a mixed economy. The term was coined by
JM Keynes. India opted for 'Mixed Economy' in the
industrial policy of 1948.
iii. Developing Economy Following features shows that
'Indian economy is a developing economy'
• Low per capita income and occupational pattern is biased
towards primary sector.
•
•
Heavy population pressure and prevalence of chronic
unemployment and under employment.
Steadily improving rate of capital formation.
Low capital per head and unequal distribution of
wealth/assets.
Broad Sectors of Indian Economy
There are three sectors of Indian economy, which are as
follows
i. Primary Sector It is directly related to the extraction or
utilisation of natural resources. Agriculture, mining,
fishing, quarrying, dairy sector and many other such
functions come under the primary sector.
ii. Secondary Sector It utilises the end product of the
primary sector, to manufacture finished goods, through
the refinement and processing of the primary products.
Construction, manufacturing, electricity, gas and water
supply come under the secondary sector.
iii. Tertiary Sector Tertiary sector generally provides
services, instead of goods to other sector. It is also
called as service sector. Business, transport,
telecommunication, banking, insurance, real estate,
community and personal services come under the
tertiary sector.

GENERAL STUDIES > Indian Economy
1011
2. Involuntary Unemployment
It refers to a situation in which the persons
are interested to work, but the jobs are not
available. Under this, there are various
categories of unemployment
•
•
•
Structural Unemployment It refers to a
mismatch of job vacancies with the
supply of labour available, caused by
shifts in the structure of the economy.
Disguised Unemployment This is a
situation in which more people are
available for work than shown in the
unemployment statistics.
Open Unemployment It is a condition
in which people have no work to do.
They are able to work and are also willing
to work, but there is no work for them.
Seasonal Unemployment It is on
account of the seasonal nature of the
productive activities i.e. some productive
activities are carried out only for certain
duration of a year.
the
type
Cyclical Unemployment This type of
unemployment is due to the recession in
economy. This of
unemployment is prevalent in the
developed countries. This is also known
as Keynesian Unemployment.
• Frictional Unemployment It occur when
a worker is shifting from one job to the
other. It is temporary phenomenon.
WELFARE
PROGRAMMES
AND SCHEMES
Indian state is a welfare state, which takes
steps to do away the human sufferings and
provides an infrastructure that is condusive
to development. The Indian Government,
since Independence, has been launching
various multi-dimensional social welfare
programmes.
Rural Development Schemes
Rural development schemes are as follows
Pradhan Mantri Gramin Digital
Saksharta Abhiyan (PMGDISHA)
PMGDISHA was launched on 8th October,
2017. It aims at imparting digital literacy to
citizens in rural areas free of cost. It aims
to provide access to information,
knowledge, education and
healthcare. It will create avenues
for livelihood generation and
financial inclusion through digital
payments and help bridge the
digital divide.
Deendayal Upadhyay Gram
Jyoti Yojana
This scheme is designed to provide
continuous power supply to the
entire rural India. It is one of the
flagship scheme of power ministry
and will facilitate 24 supply of
electricity. This scheme will replace
Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran
Yojana (RGGVY) but features of
RGGVY have been subsumed in
this scheme. Major component of
this scheme includes separation of
agriculture and non-agriculture
feeder facilitating judicious supply
of electricity to consumers in rural
areas.
Sansad Adarsh Gram
Yojana
It is a rural development and
cleanliness programme broadly
focusing upon the development in
the villages, which includes social
development, cultural development
and spread motivation among the
people on social mobilisation of the
village community.
The goal is to develop three Adarsh
Grams by March 2019, of which
one would be achieved by 2016.
Thereafter, five such Adarsh Grams
(one per year) will be selected and
developed by 2024.
MGNREGA
The National Rural Employment
Guarantee Act (NREGA) was
enacted in 2005. It was
implemented in three phases,
starting with 200 districts on 2nd
February, 2006 to cover the whole
country by 2008.
On 2nd October, 2009, it was
renamed as Mahatma Gandhi
National Rural Employment
Guarantee Act (MGNREGA).
India's rural employment guarantee
programme MGNREGA has been
ranked as the world's largest public
work programme.
The features of MGNREGA are as
follows
•
•
•
It seeks to provide at least 100 days
(150 days for tribals) of guaranteed
wage employment in one financial
year to at least one adult member of
every rural household who
volunteers to do unskilled manual
work.
At least 33% of the beneficiaries are
to be women.
Originally, it promised a wage rate
of 100 per day. From January,
2011, wages have been linked to
increase with Consumer Price Index
for Agricultural Labour (CPI-AL)
for each state.
It provides time bound employment
guarantee and wage payment within
15 days.
Urban Development
Schemes
The urban development schemes are as
follows
Heritage City Development and
Augmentation Yojana (HRIDAY)
Union Government has launched a
Heritage City Development and
Augmentation Yojana (HRIDAY)
scheme to preserve and rejuvenate the
rich cultural heritage of the country.
The scheme aims to preserve and
revitalise soul of the heritage city to
reflect the city's unique character by
encouraging aesthetically appealing,
accessible, informative and secured
environment.
AMRUT
Under Atal Mission for Rejuvenation
and Urban Transformation (AMRUT),
the government is targeting 500 cities.
It aims to transform cities and towns
into efficient urban living spaces with
special focus on a healthy and
environment for children.
green
500 cities and towns will be selected on
the basis of population i.e. one lakh and
above, while the other criteria of
selection will apply for certain locations
like tourist popularity, certain popular
hill towns and some selected islands.

1016
CDS Pathfinder
National Food Security Act, 2013
(NFSA)
•
•
NFSA is the biggest intervention of its kind in the world
in the realm of food security. If implemented property this
law can improve the lives of millions in this country.
Some of the highlights of this act are as follows
It extends to the whole of India. Priority households
are entitled to 5 kgs of foodgrains per person per
month and Antyodaya households to 35 kgs per
household per month.
Combined coverage of priority and Antyodaya
households will extend to 75% of the rural population
and 50% of the urban population.
PDS issue prices will be 3/2/1 per kg for
may
rice/wheat/millets. These be revised after 3 years.
For children in the age group 6 months to 6 years, an
age-appropriate meal will be provided through the local
Anganwadi.
For children aged 6-14 years, one free mid-day meal in
all
government and government aided schools
up to
class VII.
For children below 6 months 'exclusive breast feeding
will be promoted'.
Every pregnant and lactating mother is entitled to a
free meal at the local Anganwadi (during pregnancy
and 6 months after) and maternity benefits of 6000.
Major Schemes of Agriculture
Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana
This is the new crop damage insurance scheme that has been
approved by the Union Cabinet in January 2016. It will
replace the existing 2 insurance schemes NAIS and Modified
NAIS. The theme of the scheme is One Nation-One Scheme.
In this, all shortcomings and weaknesses of all previous
schemes were removed and incorporated with the best
features of all schemes.
Mega Food Park Scheme (MFPS)
The 10th Plan scheme of food parks was renamed as the
Mega Food Park Scheme (MFPS) in 2008. The scheme has
been launched with the objective of implementing the express
objectives of the Vision 2015, document through creation of
excellent infrastructure.
At present, 13 mega food parks are at various stages of
implementation. 12th Plan (2012-17), has targeted to set-up
50 mega food parks during the plan period.
Objectives of the Mega Food Park Scheme are as
•
follows
To provide state of the art infrastructure for food
processing in the country on a pre-identified cluster basis.
•
•
•
To ensure value addition of agricultural commodities.
To establish a sustainable raw material supply chain for
each cluster.
To facilitate induction of latest technology.
Quality assurance through better process control and
capacity building.
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY)
The RKVY was launched in 2007-08, with an outlay of
*25000 crore in the Eleventh Plan for incentivising states to
enhance public investment to achieve a 4% growth rate in
agriculture and allied sectors. The RKVY permits taking up
national priorities as sub-schemes allowing flexibility in
project selection and implementation.
Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchai Yojana
(PMKSY)
With an eye on improving farm productivity, the
government has decided to spend 50,000 crore over the
next 5 years under the Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchai
Yojana (PMKSY). The major objective of the PMKSY is to
achieve convergence of investments in irrigation at the field
level expand cultivable area under assured irrigation
improve on farm water use efficiency to reduce wastage of
water, enhance adoption of precision irrigation and other
water saving technologies.
INDUSTRIES
Industries constitute an important part of an economy.
Economic development of an economy is founded on the
advances made in the industrial sector. The Indian
Government has been trying to promote rapid industrial
growth since Independence. As a result of the various
efforts, the industrial sector in India has grown in
multifarious dimensions.
Important Industries of India
Iron and Steel Industry
• First Steel industry was set-up at Kulti (West Bengal)
'Bengal Iron Works Company' in 1870.
•
•
•
•
First large scale steel plant TISCO was set-up at
Jamshedpur in 1907 followed by IISCO at Burnpur in
1919. Both belonged to private sector.
The first public sector unit was 'Visveshvaraya Iron and
Steel Works' at Bhadrawati.
All these are managed by SAIL. (At present all important
steel plants except TISCO, are under Public Sector).
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) was established
in 1974 and was made responsible for the development
of the steel industry.

GENERAL STUDIES > Indian Economy
1021
Printing of Securities and Minting in India
Security Press
Currency Notes Press
Station
Nasik
(1928)
Security Paper
(Established 1967-68)
Hoshangabad
Bank Notes Press (1974) Dewas
Security Notes Printing
Hyderabad
Press (Established 1982)
India Security Press
Nasik
(1992)
Modernised Currency
Mysore (Karnataka)
Sarbani (West Bengal)
Notes Press (1995)
Coins are minted at four places viz, Mumbai, Kolkata,
Hyderabad and Noida.
Related by
Bank notes from 1 to
100
Banks and currency
notes paper
Bank notes of
20, 50, 100 and 500
Union excise duty
stamps
Postal material, postal
stamps etc
Reserve Bank of India (RBI)
⚫ RBI is the Central Bank of the country. It was set-up on
the basis of Hilton Young Commission recommendation in
April, 1935, with the enactment of RBI Act, 1934. Its first
Governor was Sir Osborne Smith.
The main purpose of creating RBI was to separate currency
and credit from GOI. RBI was nationalised in 1949 and its
first Indian Governor was CD Deshmukh. The 22nd RBI
Governor is Urijit Patel. He was appointed in September,
2016.
• There are 14 Directors in Central Board of Directors
besides the Governor, 4 Deputy Governors and 1
Government official. The Headquarter of the RBI is situated
in Mumbai.
.
MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
Government recently approves a six member
Monetary Policy Committee, that will set policy
interest rates. Out of the six members, three members
are from RBI including the governors, who would
have a casting vote.
. The other three external members in the committee
would be appointed by the government. Besides, the
six members, a finance ministry nominee would also
take part in the deliberations of the committee to
convey the government's view on policy, but he
won't have a voting right.
Role of the RBI
Following are the roles of the Reserve Bank of India
RBI has the obligation to transact the banking business of
the union and state governments. Hence, it is banker to the
government.
•
•
RBI provides the broad parameters within which the
banking and financial system of India functions.
As the custodian of foreign reserves, RBI is responsible
for managing the investment and utilisation of the
country's foreign reserves in the best possible manner.
Credit control is an important tool used by RBI, a
major weapon of the monetary policy used to control
the demand and supply of money (liquidity) in the
economy.
Methods of Credit Control
There are two types of methods of Credit Control
(i) Quantitative/General Credit Control
Quantitative credit control is used to control the volume
of credit and indirectly to control the inflationary and
deflationary pressures caused by expansion and
contraction of credit. The quantitative credit control
consists of
•
•
•
•
•
Bank Rate It is also called the rediscount rate. It is the
rate at which the RBI gives finance to Commercial
Banks.
Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) It is the amount of funds
that the banks are bound to keep with the RBI as a
proportion of their net demand and time liabilities.
Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) It is the ratio of
liquid asset, which all Commercial Banks have to keep
in the form of cash, gold and unencumbered approved
securities equal to not more than 40% of their total
demand and time deposits liabilities.
Repo Rate It is the rate at which RBI lends
short-term money to the banks against securities. Repo
rate injects liquidity in the market.
Reverse Repo Rate It is the rate at which banks park
short-term excess liquidity with the RBI. Reverse repo
rate withdraws liquidity from the market. This is always
100 base point/ 1% less than Repo rate.
Open Market Operations (OMOs) Under OMOS,
when the RBI sells Government securities in the
market, it withdraws money liquidity from the market
and thus, reduces volume of credit leading to control
of inflation. When it buys government securities, it
injects liquidity into the market and thus, increases
credit-volume leading to higher economic growth.
(ii) Qualitative/Selective/Direct
Credit Control
Qualitative measures are used to make sure that purpose,
for which loan is given is not misused. It is done through
credit rationing and regulating loan to consumption etc.