
--- Page 1 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 2 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             INDIAN POLITY                                                                        MCQs 
1 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
 
 
CONTENTS 
S. No 
Topic 
Page 
1. 
A Brief Overview of Science 
02 
2. 
General Science at a Glance 
02-39 
Multiple Choice Questions With Answer And Explanation 
3. 
General Science – Physics 
40-77 
4. 
General Science – Chemistry 
77-112 
5. 
General Science – Biology 
113-150 
General Science Quiz: Practice 
6. 
Physics 
151-179 
7. 
Chemistry 
180-206 
8. 
Biology 
207-235 
Previous Year Questions With Solutions 
9. 
Previous Year Questions Asked In NDA/NA Examination 
236-259 
10. 
Previous Year Questions Asked in CDS Examination 
260-280 
11. 
Previous Year Questions Asked In AFCAT Examination 
281-289 
 
 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 3 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
2 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
A Brief Overview of Science 
Science 
in 
a 
broad 
sense 
existed 
before 
the modern 
era and 
in 
many 
historical civilizations.  Modern science is distinct in its approach and successful in its results, so 
it now defines what science is in the strictest sense of the term.  
Science in its original sense was a word for a type of knowledge rather than a specialized word 
for the pursuit of such knowledge. In particular, it was the type of knowledge which people can 
communicate to each other and share. For example, knowledge about the working of natural 
things was gathered long before recorded history and led to the development of complex 
abstract thought. This is shown by the construction of complex calendars, techniques for 
making poisonous plants edible, public works at national scale, such which those which 
harnessed the floodplain of the Yangtse with reservoirs, dams, and dikes, and buildings such 
as the Pyramids. However, no consistent conscientious distinction was made between 
knowledge of such things, which are true in every community, and other types of communal 
knowledge, such as mythologies and legal systems. 
The word Science comes from Latin word "scientia" meaning "knowledge" and in broadest 
sense it is any systematic knowledge-base or prescriptive practice being capable of resulting in 
prediction. Science is a branch of knowledge or systematic study of various operations, 
structure and behaviour of physical and natural world through observations and experiments. It 
plays an important role for Exams like IAS, CDS, NDA, AFCAT, State PSC, SSC and other 
similar competitive exams. The questions in different competitive examination are such that to 
test the aspirants general awareness of a variety of disciplines. 
 
GENERAL SCIENCE AT A GLANCE 
 
3.1 DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE LIVING AND NON-LIVING 
 Life is a distinguishing characteristic of physical entities having biological processes from 
those that do not have such processes. 
 Living things are a complex organization of physical molecules, that perform various 
biological and chemical reactions in metabolism, reproduction etc., constituting an organism. 
 Non-living things, on the other hand, does not show any of such characteristics. 
Characteristics of non-living things: 
 Non-living things are made up of atoms. 
 Non-living things do not show growth or reproduce. 
 Non-living things do not respond to external stimuli. 
 Non-living things are all around as like a chair, a pen, a book etc., 
Characteristics of living things: 
 The basic units of living things are cells. These cells contain a nucleus, protoplasm and cell 
membranes. They from the basic and most important characteristics of living beings. 
 They obtain and use energy in ways like photosynthesis, metabolisms etc., 
 Living things grow and develop. 
 Living things reproduce. 
 Living things interact with the external environment and respond to external stimuli. 
 Living things adapt to their environment. 
3.2 BASIS OF LIFE - CELLS, PROTOPLASM AND TISSUES 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 4 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
3 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
 The cell is the fundamental unit of life. It is the basic structural and functional unit of all living 
things. 
 Cells from the basic life unit irrespective of the nature of the organism – either unicellular or 
multicellular and either plant or animal cell. 
 The cells of common structure and function combine to form a tissue. 
 Tissues form organs and cooperation of organs constructs an organism. 
Cell Structure: 
 Cells can be of any shape and size predetermined to perform specific functions. 
 The major constituents of a cell can be classified into two – Cell wall and protoplasm. 
Cell wall: 
 The cell wall is a thick layer surrounding the cells, giving rigidity and protection to the cells. 
 It is found only in plant and bacterial cells. Animal cells are devoid of cell walls. 
 It is a non-living physical layer, only when the cell wall is in contact with the living protoplast 
which formed it, it is capable of growth. 
 The cell wall is made of 3 layers 
 Primary wall – It is the first layer formed by the cell. It is made completely cellulose.  
 Secondary wall – It is formed in some cells when the cells have stopped growing. 
Secondary wall is laid inner in the primary wall by accretion or deposition of materials 
over the surface of existing structure. It is thick (3— 10 μm) and made up of at least three 
layers, sometimes more. They are named as S1, S2, S3, Sx etc. Along with cellulose, it 
contains other lignin, suberin, and cutin etc. 
 Middle lamella – It is a thin intercellular structure. It holds the primary walls of adjacent 
cells together. It is made up of calcium and magnesium pectates. 
 Plasma membrane – It is a thin membrane surrounding the protoplasm of a cell. It is 
found in both plant and animal cell. It is a semipermeable membrane, allowing certain 
liquids to pass through it. It is made up of proteins and lipids. 
Protoplasm 
 Protoplasm is the living physical basis of life. All the functions of living beings are functions 
of protoplasm.  
 It is a clear, colourless, jelly-like gelatinous substance. It may contain water ranging from 75 
to 90 % 
 The solid material of protoplasm contains - proteins— 40-60%, fatty substances - 12-14%; 
carbohydrates-12-14% and inorganic salts 5-7% 
 Protoplasm has two main parts –Cytoplasm and Nucleus. 
Cytoplasm 
 The plasma membrane forms the outer layer of cytoplasm. 
 It is the jelly-like structure of protoplasm excluding the nucleus. 
 It contains all other cellular organelles like mitochondria, Golgi apparatus, ribosomes etc. 
 The main functions of the cytoplasm are, 
 It holds all the cell organelles. 
 The cell organelles exchange materials through the cytoplasmic matrix. 
 The raw materials necessary for the cell organelles are provided by cytoplasm. 
 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 5 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
4 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
Endoplasmic reticulum: 
 It forms most of the volume of the protoplasm. 
 It was discovered independently by Porter (1945) and Thompson (1945).  
 It is 3-dimensional interconnected system membranes that run along the cytoplasm from the 
plasma membrane to outer nuclear membrane. 
 They can be classified as, 
 Rough or granular endoplasmic reticulum – They are rough due to the presence of 
Ribosomes. Their main function is protein synthesis. 
 Smooth or a granular endoplasmic reticulum – They are smooth due to the absence of 
Ribosomes. They are involved in synthesis of lipids and steroid hormones. 
Golgi apparatus: 
 Also known as the Golgi complex or Golgi bodies. 
 It is a sac-like flattened structure. 
 It is a packing organelle like the endoplasmic reticulum. It absorbs simple molecules and 
combines them into complex molecules. 
Ribosomes: 
 Ribosomes are the sites of protein synthesis present inside the rough endoplasmic 
reticulum. The synthesized protein is transported by endoplasmic reticulum. They also occur 
in chloroplasts and mitochondria. 
 These are non-membranous and are formed of RNA molecules. 
 Based on molecular weight they are classified into, 
 80 S – found in prokaryotes 
 70 S – found in Eukaryotes 
Lysosomes: 
 These are vacuole like bodies that secrete enzymes to digest food substances. 
 They are centers for cellular digestion. 
 Sometimes, they can even digest cellular organelles, resulting in the death of the cell. 
Centrioles: 
 It is a microtubular structure; centrioles are concerned with cell division.  
 It initiates cell division. 
 A pair of centrioles forms centrosomes. 
Mitochondria: 
 Also known as the powerhouse of the cells. 
 Mitochondria are a double membranous structure varies in diameter between 0.5 and 1.0 
μm and 7 μm long. 
 Mitochondria are the sites of cellular respiration. They release energy in the form of ATP 
(Adenosine triphosphate); in mitochondria. 
Plastids: 
 These are distinguishing features of plant cells and are present only in them. 
 They are of three types- 
 Chloroplasts – They contain chlorophyll. They synthesize sugar from carbon dioxide 
and water in the presence of sunlight. 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 6 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
5 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
 Chromoplasts – These are yellow or reddish, due to the presence of carotenoid 
pigments. Chromoplasts are formed either from leucoplasts or chloroplasts. Colour 
change in plants, for example, during ripening of fruits, is due to the transformation into 
chromoplasts. 
 Leucoplasts – These are colourless pigment cells. They occur near the nucleus in non-
green cells. 
Vacuoles: 
 Vacuoles are non-cytoplasmic areas present in the cytoplasm which is separated from the 
latter by specific membranes. 
 Depending upon the contents and functions, vacuoles are of four types-sap vacuoles, 
contractile vacuoles, food vacuoles and air vacuoles. 
 They are more common in plants than in animals. 
Nucleus: 
 A cellular nucleus is first discovered by Robert Brown in 1831. 
 The nucleus is the most important part of any cell. 
 It controls various metabolic activities and carries the genetic material. 
 Prokaryotic (unicellular) lack nucleus. 
 Genetic information in the form of DNA is stored in a threadlike structures called chromatin 
within the nucleus. 
 The chromatic is composed of nucleoproteins that are combinations of proteins and nucleic 
acids i.e. DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) and RNA (ribonucleic acid). 
 The nucleus consists of – a nuclear membrane, nucleoplasm, and nucleolus. 
Nuclear membrane: 
 It bounds the nucleus on the outside and separates the nucleus from the cytoplasm. 
 The inner membrane is smooth whereas the outer membrane may be smooth or rough due 
to the presence of ribosomes. 
 The nuclear envelope is perforated by nuclear pores which help in transport of material 
between nucleus and cytoplasm. 
Nucleoplasm: 
 It is a transparent, semi-fluid and colloidal substance which fills the nucleus. 
 It is similar to the cytoplasm, but inside the nucleus. 
 It contains nucleosides and a number of enzymes required for the synthesis and functioning 
of DNA, RNA, nucleoproteins, etc. 
Nucleolus: 
  The nucleolus is an irregular shaped membrane less structure found within the nucleus. 
 It is connected to the Chromatin present in the nucleoplasm. 
 The size of the nucleolus depends on the shape and size of the nucleus. 
Chromosomes: 
 The chromosomes are the unit of inheritance. 
 They are thread-like structures found in the nucleoplasm. 
 They contain genes, which are made up of DNA and RNA, and carries hereditary 
information from generation to generation. 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 7 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
6 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
Nucleic acids: 
 The genes are made up of nucleic acids, which form the basis of heredity. 
 These are long polymers made of repeating units called nucleotides. 
 Each nucleotide consists of a nucleoside and a phosphate base, joined together by 
phosphate diester bond. 
 The nucleic acids are of two types- 
DNA: 
 Acronym – Deoxyribose Nucleic Acid. 
 It has 4 bases – Adenine, Guanine, Cytosine, and Thymine. 
 Adenine and Guanine are purine bases and Cytosine and Thymine are pyrimidine bases. 
 DNA generally has a double stranded structure 
 They are the basic genetic materials, except in some viruses. 
 DNA can replicate to form two DNA molecules. 
 DNA controls heredity, evolution, metabolism, structure and differentiation. 
RNA: 
 Acronym – Ribose Nucleic Acid. 
 RNA is the genetic material of only certain viruses. 
 RNA generally has a single-stranded structure. 
 It is made up of 4 bases – Adenine, Guanine, Cytosine and Uracil. 
 RNA cannot replicate itself to form two RNAs. 
 RNA cannot control heredity, it controls only protein synthesis. 
 There are 3 types of RNA- 
 mRNA – messenger RNA 
 tRNA – transfer RNA 
 rRNA – ribosomal RNA 
Classification of cells: 
 Based on the number of cells. 
Prokaryotes 
Eukaryotes 
These are unicellular organisms 
without a well-defined nucleus. 
Some prokaryotes are multi cellular. 
Eg- bacterial cell 
These cells have a well-defined nucleus 
and internal cell organelles. Eg – plant 
and animal cell 
They are primitive and simple cells. 
They are developed and complex cells. 
Nucleus is absent 
Nucleus is present 
Membrane bound organelles are 
absent 
Membrane 
bound 
organelles 
are 
present 
Simple cell division 
Cell division occurs by mitosis and 
meiosis 
 
 
 
 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 8 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
7 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
 Cells can also be classified as – Plant and animal cells. 
Plant cells 
Animal cells 
The cell is enclosed by a plasma 
membrane and a rigid cell wall. 
The cell is enclosed by an only plasma 
membrane. The cell wall is absent 
Plastids are present 
Plastids are absent 
They are usually large in size 
They are usually smaller in size 
Big vacuoles are present 
Vacuoles are absent or are present only 
in smaller sizes. 
 
Cell Division: 
 The growth and development of all organisms depend upon the growth and division of cells. 
 Cell division occurs in two stages  
 Karyokinesis – Division of nucleus 
 Cytokinesis – Division of cytoplasm 
 There are two types of cell division – Mitosis and Meiosis. 
 Mitosis: It is the only form of cellular reproduction in single-cell organisms. Mitosis yields 
two genetically identical cells. This type of cell division occurs in asexual reproduction. 
 Meiosis: It occurs in reproductive cells. It results in the formation of four haploid cells 
from a single diploid cell. Hence, it is known as reduction division. 
Tissues 
 For complex living things cells work together, organized into groups, each of which has its 
own task. 
 Tissue is a group of identical cells that performs the same task. For example, Bone. 
 The tissues join to complete a task; such group tissue is called an organ. For example, the 
Human hand is an organ – made up of muscle, bone and nerve tissues. 
3.3 GROWTH AND REPRODUCTION IN PLANTS AND ANIMALS 
Growth in Plants: 
 Growth in living organisms is not uniform throughout the life span.  
 Growth takes Heredity place at a faster rate till the plants or animals attain maturity. 
 Then it slows down and at a particular time, it stops. Later in life, death occurs. 
 All these changes that occur in an organism, starting from its beginning till its death may 
collectively be termed as development. 
 The development occurs in two stages, 
 Morphogenesis - process of development of shape and structure of an organism. 
 Differentiation – the process of change in cells, tissues or organs carry out different 
functions. 
Cellular Growth 
 The growth of an organism is always associated with growth in size and number of cells. 
 Cellular growth occurs in three stages, 
 Cell division: The number of cells increases due to mitosis. 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 9 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
8 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
 Cell enlargement: The size of individual cell increases after cell division due to increase 
in the volume of its protoplasm. 
 Cell differentiation: In this stage, the structure of the cell changes to perform specific 
functions. And a similar type of cells having the same functions forms a group, which is 
known as tissue. 
 In lower level organisms like bacteria and fungi, the cells along the entire body length grow. 
 But in higher organisms, growth is restricted to the cells present only in the growing regions, 
like stem apex and root tip or along the lateral sides of the stem and root. 
 Growth at the tips leads to elongation of body parts and grow at the lateral sides leads to 
increase in the thickness of the stem and root. 
Factors affecting plant growth: 
 Various factors affect the growth of plants, 
 External factors: Light, Temperature, Water, Minerals and Nutrients 
 Internal Factors: There are some substances produced in the plant body itself, which 
affects the growth of the plant. These are called plant hormones or phytohormones or 
growth hormones. 
 The naturally produced growth hormones are broadly grouped into five major classes. They 
are, 
(i) Auxin: 
 Auxin is a growth promoter, generally produced by the growing apex of the stem and root of 
the plants. It helps in the elongation of the shoot and root tips behind apical meristem. 
 The naturally produced auxins are Indole-3-Acetic Acid (IAA). 
Functions of Auxin: 
 It promotes cell elongation. 
 It suppresses the growth of lateral bud. If the tip of a plant is removed, the lateral branches 
begin to grow. In most of the plants, apical bud suppresses the development of lateral buds. 
This is called apical dominance. 
(ii) Gibberellin: 
 Gibberellin or Gibberellic Acid (GA) was initially isolated from a fungus Gibberella fujikuroi. 
 In plants, it is produced in embryos, roots, and young leaves and it enhances growth. 
Functions of Gibberellins: 
 It helps in elongation of stems of genetically dwarf plants. By using gibberellin the height of 
the dwarf plants can be increased. 
 It induces parthenocarpy. (Formation of seedless fruits without fertilization). 
(iii) Cytokinins: 
 Cytokinins are synthesized in root the apex, endosperm of seeds, and young fruits where 
cell division takes place continuously. 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 10 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
9 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
Functions of Cytokinins: 
 They stimulate cell division, cell enlargement, and cell differentiation. 
 They prevent aging of plant parts. 
 They inhibit apical dominance and help in the growth of lateral buds into branches. 
 
(iv) Ethylene: 
 Ethylene is a gaseous hormone. It is found in ripening fruits, young flowers, and young 
leaves. 
Functions of Ethylene: 
 It induces ripening of fruits. 
 It promotes senescence and abscission of leaf and flowers. 
 In cells, it only increases the width not the length. 
(v) Abscisic acid: 
 Abscisic acid also known as Dormin is a naturally occurring growth inhibitor found in a wide 
variety of plants. It is synthesized in leaves. 
Functions of Abscisic acid:  
 It induces dormancy of buds and seeds as opposed to Gibberellin, which breaks dormancy. 
 It promotes the senescence of leaf i.e., the fall of leaves happens due to abscissic acid. 
 It inhibits seed germination and development.  
 It causes the closing of Stomata. 
Germination of seeds: 
 Seed germination is the return of metabolic activities and growth of the seed tissue to give 
rise to a new plant by the development of the embryo. 
 There are two types of seed germination  
 Epigeal germination - In epigeal germination hypocotyl (the region below cotyledons) 
elongates and cotyledons come out above the soil surface. Examples: seeds of pumpkin, 
mustard, tamarind, and french bean. 
 Hypogeal Germination - In hypogeal germination the epicotyl (the region above 
cotyledons)   elongates and cotyledons remain below the soil surface. Examples: Most 
monocots seed like rice, wheat, maize, and coconut. 
 Five factors affect the seed germination - water, temperature, oxygen, light and growth 
hormones. 
Photoperiodism: 
 The effect of duration of light on the growth of plants is known as photoperiodism. 
 On the basis of light required by the plants for flowering, the plants are classified into the 
following three categories: 
 Short-day Plants - Some plants produce flowers when exposed to a light for a shorter 
period than usual. These are called Short-day Plants. Cosmos, Dahlia, Soyabean, are 
short-day plants. 
 Long-day Plants – Some plants, flowers when exposed to a light for a period longer 
than usual. Gulmohar, radish, spinach, are long-day plants. 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 11 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
10 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
 Day-neutral Plants – Flowering in these plants are not affected by a light period. 
Cucumber, Tomato, and Sunflower, are day-neutral plants. 
Vernalisation: 
 Vernalisation is the process of accelerating the process of flowering by subjecting or 
exposing the plant to low temperature. 
 For example, by applying a temperature ranging between 1-10° C to certain variety of wheat, 
rice and cotton, growth of seedlings is accelerated and flowering occurs earlier 
 Plants whose life cycle are completed in two seasons (biennials) can produce flowers in one 
season if their seeds are pre-treated to a low temperature. 
Plant movements  
Tropic Movement: 
 Growth of plants towards or away from environmental factors is called tropic movements. 
 Phototropism: Induced by light i.e., bending of branches and stems towards the light. 
 Geotropism: Induced by gravity, e.g. growth of roots towards gravity. 
 Thigmotropism: Movement caused by contact. 
 Hydrotropism: Induced by water, i.e., growth of roots towards source of water. 
Turgor Movements: 
 It is the movement due to the change in volume of water inside a cell. 
 When more water is present in the cell, it expands and becomes rigid or hard. Such a cell is 
said to be turgid. 
 When the cell retains less water, it is not fully expanded and remains soft. This is called 
flaccid condition. 
Reproduction in plants: 
 Reproduction is the process by which individuals produce their offsprings and pass on 
genetic information to the next generation. 
 Plants reproduce both sexually and asexually. 
Asexual reproduction in plants: 
 Asexual reproduction occurs when a single parent is involved in the process. 
 The different means of asexual reproduction in plants are, 
 Budding – This is the method of reproduction of unicellular plant species like yeast. The 
unicellular organism produces a protrude on its cell wall called Bud. The bud gets its own 
nucleus replicated from parent nucleus. The bud then gets detached and develops into a 
new plant. 
 Fragmentation – When some plants fragment into certain smaller pieces. Each piece 
develops into a new plant. This method of reproduction is called fragmentation. Example 
– Spirogyra. 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 12 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
11 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
 Spore Formation: Special spore-bearing organs are present in some plants; especially 
in fungi and algae, called sporangiophores. The sporangiophore bears spores. The 
spores germinate to develop a new plant. 
 Vegetative propagation – In certain plants, a new plant can develop from a vegetative 
part such as a stem, root or a leaf. 
Sexual reproduction in plants: 
 
In sexual reproduction, two parents are involved. Hence two gametes are produced in these 
plants - male and female gametes. 
 
The fusion of male and female gametes is called fertilization.  
 
A Zygote is formed after fertilization. 
 
The zygote develops into an embryo and finally into a new individual. 
Flower: 
 Flower is the sexual reproductive organ of a plant. 
 A typical angiospermic flower consists of four whorls of floral appendages: calyx, corolla, 
androecium and gynoecium. 
  Calyx: It is the outermost whorl of the flower. It is composed of leaflike green sepals. The 
sepals are essentially green in colour, but in some cases, they are coloured like petals. 
 Corolla: This is the second whorl of the flower and consists of a number of petals. Petals 
are generally brightly coloured and sometimes fragrant which make the flower to become 
attractive. 
 Androecium: It is the third whorl of the flower and is the male reproductive organ consisting 
of stamens. Each stamen is made of filament and anther. The filament supports the anther 
at its tip. 
 Gynoecium: This is the last and the fourth whorl of flower and is the female reproductive 
organ of the flower. It is composed of ovary, style and stigma. 
Microsporogenesis: 
 It is a process of the formation and differentiation of microspores (pollen grains) from 
microspore mother cells (MMC). 
 As development occurs in the anther, the sporogenous cells undergo meiosis to form 
microspore tetrad. 
 Each cell of the sporogenous tissue has ability to give rise to a tetrad. 
 As anther matures, the microspores get detached from each other and forms pollen grain. 
Macrosporogenesis: 
 The process of formation of megaspore from the megaspore mother cell by meiotic division 
is known as megasporogenesis. This process takes place in ovule. 
 The megaspore mother cell is large and contains dense cytoplasm and a prominent nucleus. 
It undergoes meiosis to form 4 megaspores. 
 In most plants, only one megaspore functions and the other three degenerates. 
 The single functional megaspore develops into a female gametophyte. 
 
 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 13 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
12 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
Pollination: 
 Pollination is the process of transfer of pollen grains from the anther to the stigma of the 
same flower or between the different flowers. 
 Self-pollination: This process involves the transfer of pollen grains from the anthers to the 
stigma of the same flower or of another flower of the same plant. 
 Cross-pollination: Cross pollination involves the transfer of pollen grains from the flower of 
one plant to the stigma of the flower of another plant. It is also known as xenogamy. 
Fertilization: 
 The fusion of a male and a female reproductive unit is called fertilization. 
 After pollination, Pollen grains get attached. 
Male Reproductive Organs 
 The male reproductive organs include a pair of testes (singular, testis), two sperm ducts and 
a penis.  
 The testis produces the male gametes called sperms. 
 Millions of sperms are produced by the testes.  
 Each sperm is a single cell with all the usual cell components. 
Female Reproductive Organs: 
 The female reproductive organs are a pair of ovaries, oviducts (fallopian tubes) and the 
uterus.  
 Ovary produces female gametes called ova (eggs).  
 Uterus is the part where the development of the baby takes place.  
Fertilization: 
 When sperms come in contact with an egg, one of the sperms may fuse with the egg.  
 Such fusion of the egg and the sperm is called fertilization.  
 During fertilization, the nuclei of the sperm and the egg fuse to form a single nucleus. This 
results in the formation of a fertilized egg or zygote. 
 Internal fertilization - Fertilization which takes place inside the female body is called 
internal fertilization. Internal fertilization occurs in many animals including humans, cows, 
dogs and hens. 
 External fertilization -. Type of fertilization in which the fusion of a male and a female 
gamete takes place outside the body of the female is called external fertilization. It is very 
common in aquatic animals such as fish, starfish, etc. 
Development of Embryo 
 Fertilization results in the formation of a zygote which begins to develop into an embryo. The 
zygote divides repeatedly to give rise to a ball of cells. 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 14 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
13 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
 The cells then begin to form groups that develop into different tissues and organs of the 
body. 
 This developing structure is termed an embryo.  
 The embryo gradually develops the body parts such as hands, legs, head, eyes, ears, etc. 
The stage of the embryo in which all the body parts can be identified is called a foetus.  
 When the development of the foetus is complete, the mother gives birth to the baby. 
 In animals which undergo external fertilization, development of the embryo takes place 
outside the female body. The embryos continue to grow within their egg coverings. After the 
embryos develop, the eggs hatch. 
 Viviparous animals – gives birth. 
 Oviparous animals – lays eggs. 
Asexual Reproduction 
 In asexual reproduction, only one parent is involved 
 It mostly happens in primitive microscopic animals. 
 In hydra, reproduction occurs by budding. A bud is developed and detached which develops 
into a new organism. 
Another type of asexual reproduction is found in unicellular amoeba called Binary Fission. 
The nucleus first divides into two, followed by the division of the body into two each part 
receiving a nucleus. 
3.4 ELEMENTARY KNOWLEDGE OF HUMAN BODY AND ITS IMPORTANT ORGANS 
Musculoskeletal system: 
 The skeletal system includes the bones of the skeleton and the cartilages, ligaments, and 
other connective tissue that stabilize or connect the bones.  
Bones: 
 There are 206 bones in the adult body.  
 Longest bone – Femur (thigh bone). And smallest bone – Stapes (in the ear). 
 The bones of the body perform five main functions- 
 provides support for the body 
 Stores minerals and lipids 
 Produce blood cells 
 Protect body organs 
 Provide leverage and movement 
 Each bone in the skeleton contains two forms of tissue: compact bone that is relatively solid 
and spongy bone. Compact bone is found on the external surface of the bone. Spongy bone 
is located inside the bone. 
 Joints - Connects two bones together. 
 Ligaments –They connect different bones. 
 Tendons – They connect tissue with bones. They are made of collagen. 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 15 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
14 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
 Cartilage — It is a type of connective tissue. It is a firm gel-like substance. The body 
contains three major types of cartilage: hyaline cartilage, elastic cartilage, and fibrocartilage. 
Muscular system: 
 
Maintains posture and produces movement.  
 
Produces heat. 
 
The muscular system consists of Skeletal, smooth and cardiac muscles. 
 
Largest muscle – Gluteus Maximus (buttock) and smallest muscle – Stapedius (in the ear). 
Digestive system: 
 The human digestive system is a complex process to break down complex food particles 
into smaller ones that can be absorbed by our body. 
 The human digestive system consists of the alimentary canal and the associated glands. 
 Alimentary Canal: The alimentary canal begins at the mouth and ends in the anus. Mouth is 
situated in the anterior part and anus is situated at the posterior part of the body. The 
alimentary canal can be divided into five main parts, viz. mouth, oesophagus, stomach, 
small intestine and large intestine. 
 Buccal Cavity: The mouth opens into the buccal cavity or oral cavity. A muscular tongue 
and a number of teeth are present in the buccal cavity. 
 Tongue: Tongue is a freely movable muscular organ. It is attached to the floor of the buccal 
cavity. 
 Pharynx: The oral cavity leads into the pharynx. The pharynx serves as a common passage 
for food and air. 
 Oesophagus: The oesophagus is a long tube which connects the buccal cavity to the 
stomach. A muscular sphincter; called gastro-oesophageal sphincter regulates the opening 
of the oesophagus into the stomach. Epiglottis prevents the entry of food into the lungs 
during swallowing. 
 Stomach: Stomach is a J-shaped bag-like structure. It is situated in the upper left portion of 
the abdominal cavity. There are three major parts of the stomach, viz. the cardiac, fundic 
and pyloric regions. 
 Small Intestine: Small intestine is a long and highly coiled structure. It is divided into three 
regions, viz. duodenum, jejunum and ileum. The duodenum is U-shaped, jejunum is 
somewhat coiled and the ileum is highly coiled. The opening of the stomach into the 
duodenum is guarded by the pyloric sphincter. 
 Large Intestine: Ileum opens into the large intestine. The large intestine is somewhat 
shorter than the small intestine but has a larger diameter. The large intestine consists of 
caecum, colon and rectum. The caecum is a blind sac which hosts some symbiotic 
microorganisms. 
 Appendix: This is a narrow finger-like tubular projection situated at the junction of small and 
large intestines.  
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 16 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
15 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
 Colon: Colon is divided into three parts, i.e. an ascending, a transverse and a descending 
part. The descending colon opens into the rectum. The rectum; in turn; opens out through 
the anus. 
Digestive glands 
Salivary Glands 
 There are three pairs of salivary glands, viz. parotids, sub-maxillary/submandibular and 
sublingual.  
 The parotids are present in the cheek. The sub-maxillary/sub-mandibular is present in the 
jaws. The sublinguals are present below the tongue.  
 The salivary glands secrete salivary juice into the buccal cavity. 
Liver 
 The liver is situated in the abdominal cavity, just below the diaphragm.  
 The Liver secretes bile and is stored and concentrated in the gall bladder. 
 The gall bladder is a thin muscular sac, situated above the liver. 
 The duct of the gall bladder (cystic duct); along with the hepatic duct forms the common bile 
duct. 
 The bile duct and the pancreatic duct open into the duodenum as the common hepato-
pancreatic duct.  
 The hepato-pancreatic duct is guarded by a sphincter called the sphincter of Oddi. 
Pancreas 
 The pancreas is both exocrine and endocrine. 
 It is an elongated organ. This is situated between the limbs of the U-shaped duodenum.  
 The exocrine portion of the pancreas secretes and alkaline pancreatic juice, which contains 
various enzymes. 
 The endocrine portion of the pancreas secretes hormones; insulin and glucagon. 
Respiratory system 
 The process of releasing energy from food is called respiration. 
 Respiration involves taking in oxygen into the blood, which is used to breakdown, fuel and 
release energy and releasing carbon dioxide out. 
Nose 
 The respiratory system of humans begins with the nose. 
 Hairs and hair like cilia trap dust particles and purify the air. 
Pharynx 
 The nasal chambers open into a cavity at the rear of the mouth called the pharynx (throat). 
 From the pharynx, two tubes called the Eustachian tubes open to the middle ear to equalize 
air pressure there. 
 The pharynx also contains tonsils and adenoids, which traps and filter microorganisms. 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 17 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
16 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
Trachea 
 After passing through the pharynx, air passes into the trachea or the windpipe.  
 The opening to the trachea is a slit-like structure called the glottis. A thin flap of tissue 
called the epiglottis folds over the opening during swallowing and prevents food from 
entering the trachea. 
 At its lower end, the trachea branches into two large bronchi. 
 The bronchi branch into smaller bronchioles, forming a bronchial ―tree.‖ 
 The bronchioles terminate in the alveoli. 
Lungs 
 Human lungs are composed of approximately 300 million alveoli. 
 Oxygen from each alveolus enters the red blood cells and binds to the haemoglobin. 
 In addition, carbon dioxide contained in the plasma and red blood cells leaves the capillaries 
and enters the alveoli. 
 When a person inhales, the rib muscles and diaphragm contract, thereby increasing the 
volume of the chest cavity. This increase leads to reduced air pressure in the chest cavity, 
and air rushes into the alveoli, forcing them to expand and fill. 
 During exhalation, the rib muscles and the diaphragm relax, the chest cavity volume 
diminishes, and the internal air pressure increases. The air flows out. 
Excretory System 
 The human excretory system functions to remove waste from the human body. 
 The human excretory system includes the kidneys and their functional unit, the nephron. 
Kidneys 
 They are bean-shaped organs located on either side of the backbone at about the level of 
the stomach and liver. 
 Blood enters the kidneys through the renal arteries and leaves through renal veins. 
 Ureters carry waste products from the kidneys to the urinary bladder, where it is 
temporarily stored. 
 Kidneys perform a number of homeostatic functions: 
 Maintain volume of extracellular fluid 
 Maintain ionic balance in extracellular fluid 
 Maintain pH and osmotic concentration of the extracellular fluid. 
 Excrete toxic metabolic by-products such as urea, ammonia, and uric acid. 
Control of kidney function: 
 
The activity of the nephron in the kidney is controlled by a person‘s choice and environment 
as well as hormones. 
 
Humans 
produce 
a 
hormone 
called antidiuretic 
hormone (ADH), 
also 
known 
as vasopressin, which is secreted by the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland. 
 
It regulates the amount of urine by controlling the rate of water absorption in the nephron 
tubules. 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 18 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
17 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
 
Hormones from the cortex of the adrenal glands also control the content of urine. 
Reproductive system (Male) 
 The male reproductive organs include the testes, seminal vesicles, penis and some 
associated glands such as the prostate gland. 
Testis 
 The most important male reproductive organ is the testis 
 It produces sperms. There are two oval testes, each contained in a protective bag called the 
scrotum (or scrotal sac), lying outside the abdominal cavity. 
 The scrotal sac can elongate and contract depending upon the body temperature and 
external temperature.  
 Sperms from the testis pass through the sperm duct, known as vas deferens. 
  The vas deferens runs interiorly up to the urinary bladder, from where it leads downward 
and is joined by a duct from the seminal vesicle. 
 The seminal vesicle is an elongated sac at the base of the urinary bladder. For each testis, 
there is one vas deferens and one seminal vesicle.  
 The functions of a seminal vesicle are to store the sperms that have come from the testis 
and to secrete seminal fluid, or semen, in which the sperms float. 
Prostate gland 
 The sperm ducts from both sides join near the base of the urinary bladder, opening into a 
single tube called urethra. This junction occurs inside the prostate gland. 
 The prostate gland adds its secretion to the seminal fluid. The urethra leads to the outside of 
the body through an organ called a penis. 
 It carries both urine and seminal fluid. 
Penis 
 The penis is a muscular, tubular organ made up of loose tissue with spaces in between.  
 On being stimulated, the penis fills with blood, making the penis erect and firm, so that it 
may enter the vagina of the female and discharge the sperms. 
Sperm 
 The sperm is the male gamete.  
 It has a head and a long tail, which helps it swim towards the ovum (egg). 
Reproductive system (Female) 
 The female reproductive organs include the ovaries. Fallopian tubes, uterus and vagina. 
Ovary 
 The ovaries are a pair of small, oval organs in the lower part of the abdominal cavity.  
 They produce ova. The ova start maturing when the female reaches puberty. 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 19 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
18 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
 Every 28 days, one of the ovaries releases an ovum. When an ovum is released from the 
ovary, it is taken up by a thin Fallopian tube (also called oviduct) through its funnel-shaped 
opening.  
 The ovum is passed down the duct and into the uterus, which passes it out of the body 
through the vagina. The ovum is very small and, therefore, hardly noticeable. 
Fallopian tube 
 The Fallopian tubes, or oviducts, are a pair of thin tubes that lead from the ovaries to the 
uterus. 
 Each Fallopian tube has a funnel-shaped opening near the ovary. It is lined by cilia.  
 The cilia help conduct the ovum down the Fallopian tube and into the uterus. 
Uterus 
 The uterus (womb) is a hollow, pear-shaped, elastic muscular structure. Its upper portion, 
into which the Fallopian tubes enter, is broader.  
 The narrow, lower portion, called cervix, consists of a ring of muscles. The uterus opens into 
the vagina through the cervix. 
 A fertilized ovum (zygote) develops into a baby inside the uterus. 
Vagina 
 The vagina is a tube leading to the outside of the body through an opening called vulva.  
 The vagina is the organ where sperm is discharged. It is also the passage through which the 
fully developed baby is born. 
Fertilization 
 When semen is discharged in the vagina during sexual intercourse, the sperms begin 
moving up the vagina and uterus, finally reaching the Fallopian tubes. 
 Only one sperm enters the ovum. Most of the sperms die while climbing up the Fallopian 
tubes. A sperm can remain alive in the Fallopian tube for about 12 hours. 
 In this span of time, if it meets the ovum, it is likely to enter the ovum. This is called 
fertilization. 
Circulatory system 
 
The human circulatory system consists of: 
 Blood vessels 
 Heart 
 Blood 
Blood vessels 
 
Arteries: blood vessels that carry blood away from the heart in pulses. It has a thick wall 
and small lumen. 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 20 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
19 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
 
Veins: Blood vessels that carry blood towards the heart in an even flow. They have thin 
walls, a large lumen and valves. 
 
Capillaries: blood vessels with walls one cell thick that carries blood from arterioles to 
venules through tissues, releasing nutrients and taking away waste. 
 
Blood circuit in Human is of two types, 
 The systemic circuit carries blood to all the major organs of the body, except the lungs. 
 The Pulmonary circuit carries blood to and from the lungs. 
          Heart: 
 Left atrium: upper left chamber of the heart that receives blood from the lungs and contracts 
pumping blood into the left ventricle. 
 Right atrium: upper right chamber of the heart that receives blood from the vena cava and 
contracts pumping blood into the right ventricle. 
 Left ventricle: strongest of the four heart chambers and pumps blood into the aorta. 
 Right ventricle: Pumps deoxygenated blood to the lungs via the pulmonary artery. 
 Aorta: largest artery in the body carrying oxygenated blood away from the left side of the 
heart to all the major organs of the body (except the lungs). 
 Pulmonary artery: carries deoxygenated blood away from the right side of the heart to the 
lungs to excrete carbon dioxide and absorb more oxygen. 
 Pulmonary vein: carries oxygenated blood towards the right-hand side of the heart from the 
lungs. 
 Superior vena cava: carries deoxygenated blood from the upper half of the body back to 
the heart. 
 Inferior vena cava: carries deoxygenated blood from the lower half of the body back to the 
heart. 
 Bicuspid valve: allows one-way flow of blood from the left atrium into the left ventricle - 
prevents back-flow of blood. 
 Tricuspid valve: allows one-way flow of blood from the right atrium to the right ventricle - 
preventing back-flow of blood. 
 Chordae tendineae: connective tissue holding the heart valves in position. 
 Septum: divides the heart into two separate pumps. 
 Papillary muscle: contracts preventing the heart valves prolapsing backwards. 
 Semilunar valves: allow one-way flow of blood out of the heart - prevent back-flow of blood 
into the heart. 
The Cardiac Cycle 
 
The cardiac cycle is controlled by two pacemakers in the heart: 
 The sinoatrial node (SA node) located in the top wall of the right atrium 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 21 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
20 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
 The atrioventricular node (AV node) located in between the right atrium and ventricle. 
Atrial systole and ventricular diastole: 
 
Atria receive blood from the major veins (vena cava and pulmonary veins). 
 
The SA node sends an electrical signal to the cardiac muscle of the atria. 
 
The atria contract (systole). 
 
The bicuspid and tricuspid valves open. 
 
Blood flows into the ventricles and the ventricles remain relaxed (diastole) 
Ventricular systole and atrial diastole: 
 
Electrical signal reaches the AV node, which relays the signal onto the cardiac muscle of the 
ventricles. 
 
The ventricles contract (systole). 
 
The bicuspid and tricuspid valves close and the semilunar valves open. 
 
Blood flows out of the heart via the aorta and pulmonary artery. 
Nervous system 
 
The Human nervous system consists of the following major parts- 
 Central Nervous system – it includes the brain and spinal cord 
 Peripheral nervous system – Includes cranial and spinal nerves. 
Central Nervous System (CNS) 
Brain: 
 
The brain lies in the cranium inside the human skull. 
 
The brain consists of the following parts- 
Forebrain 
 Cerebrum – Largest part of human brain. It is made up of two cerebral hemispheres joined 
together by the corpus callosum. It controls consciousness and control of memory. 
 Thalamus - The thalamus is a small structure within the brain located just above the brain 
stem between the cerebral cortex and the midbrain and has extensive nerve connections to 
both. The main function of the thalamus is to relay motor and sensory signals to the 
cerebral cortex. 
 Hypothalamus – It lies at the base of the thalamus. It controls homeostasis, equilibrium, 
body temperature, controls respiration and heartbeat. 
Midbrain 
 It is a small stem which serves as a path between forebrain and hindbrain. 
 It is associated with vision, hearing, motor control, sleep/wake, alertness, and temperature 
regulation. 
 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 22 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
21 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
Hindbrain 
 Cerebellum – It is part of hindbrain and is usually smaller than cerebrum in most vertebrates. 
It is responsible for accurate movement and balance. 
 Medulla Oblongata – It is the hindmost part of the brain. It connects brain with the spinal 
cord. It controls all the involuntary movements (uncontrolled movements) like breathing, 
saliva secretion, heartbeat and reflex actions. 
 Ventricles of brain- Ventricles are the cavities in the brain. All these cavities contain 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). The fluid protects the brain from shock. 
Spinal cord 
 It is the reflex center of the brain. 
 It controls all the reflex actions, both natural and acquired. 
 It is made up of butterfly shapes, grey matter covered by white matter. 
Peripheral nervous system 
 It forms the nervous system other than the CNS. 
 These constitute the nerves that run along the body. 
 Cranial nerves – These are 12 pair of nerves that connect with the brain.  
 Spinal nerves – These are 31 pairs in number. They connect with the spinal cord. 
 Each spinal nerve connects with the spinal cord at two points – Dorsal root and a ventral 
root. 
 The peripheral nervous system is differentiated into –  
 Somatic nervous system – governs voluntary action and body reflexes. 
 Autonomous nervous system – regulates involuntary actions like breathing and 
heartbeat. 
Endocrine system 
 The endocrine system is a set of hormone secreting glands within the body. 
 The human endocrine system watches over and coordinates all the systems of the body with 
the use of hormones. 
Pituitary gland 
 The pituitary gland is located at the base of the human brain. 
 It is made of two parts-  
 Anterior pituitary lobe: 
 GROWTH HORMONE ‐ GH – controls growth and development 
 PROLACTIN – develops breast tissue, stimulates production of milk after childbirth. 
 THYROID‐STIMULATING HORMONE – TSH ‐ controls thyroid gland. 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 23 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
22 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
 ADRENOCORTICOTROPIC HORMONE – ACTH – stimulates adrenal cortex. 
 FOLLICLE‐STIMULATING HORMONE – FSH ‐ stimulates growth of graafian follicle and 
production of oestrogen in females, sperm in males. 
 LUTEINIZING HORMONE – LH – stimulates ovulation and formation of corpus luteum, 
which produces progesterone in females. 
 Posterior pituitary globe: 
 VASOPRESSIN – converts to ADH (antidiuretic hormone) in the bloodstream, acts of 
kidney to concentrate urine and preserve H2O in the body. 
 OXYTOCIN – released during childbirth causing contractions of the uterus. 
 Thyroid Gland: 
 The thyroid gland lies against the pharynx at the base of the neck. 
 It consists of two lateral lobes connected by an isthmus. 
 It produces two hormones, 
 Thyroxine - regulates the rate of metabolism in the body. 
 Calcitonin - regulates the level of calcium in the blood. 
Parathyroid gland: 
 The parathyroid glands are located on the posterior surfaces of the thyroid gland.  
 They produce a hormone called parathormone. 
 It helps to control calcium level in the blood and prevent hypocalcemia. 
Adrenal gland: 
 The adrenal glands are two pyramid-shaped glands lying atop the kidneys. 
 They produce steroids called corticosteroids. 
 There are two main types of corticosteroids –  
 Glucocorticoids – controls glucose metabolism. 
 Mineralocorticoids – Controls mineral metabolism. 
 The adrenal medulla secretes two hormones – epinephrine (adrenaline) and norepinephrine 
(non-adrenaline). 
Pancreas: 
 The pancreas is located just behind the stomach. Its endocrine portion consists of cell 
clusters called the islets of Langerhans. 
 It produces two hormones: insulin and glucagon. 
 Insulin – Promotes conversion of glucose into glycogen and store it in the body. 
 Glucagon – promotes the breakdown of glucagon into glucose. 
 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 24 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
23 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
Other endocrine glands: 
 
The ovaries secrete oestrogens - encourage the development of secondary female 
characteristics. 
 
The testes secrete androgens - which promote secondary male characteristics. 
 
Thymus gland secretes Thymosin- which influences the development of the T-
lymphocytes 
Sensory organs: 
Human Eye: 
 The human eye is a spherical structure which fits in the eye socket in the skull bone. There 
are following main parts in the human eye. 
 Pupil: Pupil is the round black spot in front of the eye. It regulates the amount of light 
entering the eyes. Pupil works like the aperture of a camera. In case of dim light, pupil 
dilates to allow more light to enter the eyes. In case of strong light pupil constrict allowing 
less light to enter. 
 Irish: Irish is made of muscles. They control the size of opening of pupil. 
 Lens: Lens lies just behind the pupil. Lens becomes thin to increase its focal length. This 
enables us to see distant objects clearly. To focus on nearer objects, the lens becomes thick 
to decrease its focal length. But there is a limit. The minimum distance of clear vision is 25 
cm. Below this distance, we cannot see things clearly. 
 Retina: Retina works like a screen or camera film. Retina is full of light and colour sensitive 
cells. These cells, upon receiving image send electrical signals to the brain, which 
processes this information to make a mental image of what we see. The photoreceptor cells 
in the eye are of two types, viz. Rod cells and cone cells. The rod cells are sensitive to dim 
light. The cone cells are sensitive to bright light and colour. 
Human Ear: 
External Ear: 
 The external or outer ear consists of three parts, the pinna, the auditory canal or meatus, 
and the ear drum.  
 The pinna collects the sound waves which travel through a small air-filled duct, called the 
auditory canal to the eardrum. 
 The eardrum is a thin membrane located at the end of the canal and it makes the inner 
boundary of the external ear. 
Middle Ear 
 The middle ear consists of three tiny bones called the ossicles. These bones are connected 
like a series of levers. 
 The energy is mechanically transmitted and the amplification takes place through the middle 
ear.  
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 25 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
24 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
 The three bones of the middle ear, Which are collectively called ossicles are Malleus 
(hammer), Incus (anvil) and Stapes (stirrup).  
 The malleus, or hammer, is connected to the eardrum. It moves the incus or anvil, which in 
turn, moves the stapes or stirrup. The stakes are attached to the oval window.  
 The Eustachian tube connects the middle year it with the mouth cavity. 
Inner Ear 
 The inner ear is the most complicated of the three major parts of the ear. 
 It consists of two kinds of sensory organs. One is concerned with the sense of balance and 
the other with hearing. 
  The organs for the balance are called vestibular sense organs. 
 
The sense organs for hearing are located in a bony structure called the Cochlea. 
 
Cochlea contains three liquid- filled canals lying one on top of the other. These three canals 
are the vestibular canal, the cochlea canal and the tympanic canal. 
 
Hearing mechanism - When a sound wave reaches the ears, it will pass through the outer 
ear, go down to auditory canal, and get into tympanic membrane. Sound wave vibrates the 
tympanic membrane, hammer bone, stapes, and finally goes into the oval window. As a 
result, it vibrates the cochlea fluid and stimulates hearing nerve. The nerve beginning sends 
impulses to the cerebrum and interpreted it.  
Nose 
 
The nose is the sense of smell. 
 
Smell is produced by chemical stimulation in the form of gas. 
 
Gas goes into nose cavity, diffuses into mucus layers and binds with a receptor in the 
dendrite.  
 
The gas will stimulate olfactory cell, so that the impulses from olfactory nerves move toward 
the brain. The impulse will be interpreted as smell. 
 
Tongue 
 
Taste is produced from chemical stimulation in the form of solution. 
 
At the tip of waste verves there are taste papillae (Gemma gustatory).  
 
The taste papillae have a bottle-like (pumpkin) shape which lies in front, back, and along the 
tongue edge. 
 
It is composed of support cell and taste cell containing microvillus. 
 
In microvillus, there is a protein molecule receptor that enables the brain to detect the taste 
of sweet, bitter, salty, or sour.  
Skin 
 
Skin comprise of five receptors, namely receptor of touch (Meissner nerve and Merkel disc), 
pressure (Paccini nerve), pain (nerve without membrane), heat (Ruffini nerve or Mazzoni 
golgi), and cold (Krause nerve).  
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 26 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
25 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
 
Sensory nerves on skin are scattered unevenly and can be found in different depth. 
3.5 COMMON EPIDEMICS, THEIR CAUSES AND PREVENTION: 
 Epidemics – Diseases that are infectious and spread to a large number of people. 
 Any condition which interferes with the normal functioning of the body is called a disease.  
 Congenital diseases – These are diseases that are present from birth. They may be due to 
genetic disorder or metabolic malfunctioning. 
 Acquired diseases – These are diseases that one may acquire during his lifetime. 
 Acquired diseases are being classified into two  
 Communicable diseases: The diseases which can be transmitted from an infected 
person to a healthy person.  
 Non-communicable diseases: These diseases do not spread from an affected person to 
a healthy person. 
Communicable Diseases 
TUBERCULOSIS 
 Pathogen: Mycobacterium tuberculosis. 
 Mode of Transmission: airborne-discharged through a cough and sneeze, of the infected 
person. 
 Incubation period: 2-10 weeks during which the bacteria produce a toxin, tuberculin.  
Symptoms 
 Persistent fever and coughing. 
 Chest pain and blood come out with the sputum. 
 General weakness. 
Prevention and Cure 
 Isolation of patients to avoid the spread of infection.  
 BCG vaccination is given to children as a preventive measure. 
TYPHOID 
 Pathogen: Salmonella typhi. 
 Mode of transmission: Through contaminated food and water. 
 Incubation period: About 1-3 weeks. 
Symptoms: 
 Continuous fever, headache, slow pulse rate. 
 Reddish rashes appear on the belly.  
 In extreme cases, ulcers may rupture, resulting in the death of the patient. 
 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 27 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
26 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
Prevention and Cure: 
 Anti-typhoid inoculation should be given. 
 Avoid taking exposed food and drinks. 
 Proper sanitation and cleanliness should be maintained. 
 Proper disposal of excreta of the patient. 
 Antibiotics should be administered. 
CHOLERA 
 Common in areas with poor sanitary conditions. 
 Pathogen: Vibrio cholera. 
 Mode of transmission: Contaminated food and water.  
 Incubation period: 6 hours to 2-3 days. 
Symptoms 
 Acute diarrhoea and watery stool. 
 Muscular cramps. 
 Loss of minerals through urine. 
 Dehydration leads to death. 
Prevention and cure 
 Cholera vaccination should be given.  
 Electrolytes (Na, K, sugar) dissolved in water should be given to the patient to check 
dehydration. 
 Proper washing and cooking of food. 
MALARIA: 
 Pathogen: Malaria parasite (different species of Plasmodium). 
 Mode of transmission: By bite of female Anopheles mosquitoes.  
 Incubation period: Approximately 12 days. 
Symptoms 
 Headache, nausea and muscular pain. 
 Feeling of chilliness and shivering followed by a fever, which becomes normal along with 
sweat after some time. 
 The patient becomes weak and anaemic. 
 If not treated properly secondary complications may lead to death. 
Prevention and cure 
 Use of mosquito net and mosquito repellents. 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 28 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
27 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
 No water should be allowed to collect in ditches or other open spaces to prevent mosquito 
breeding. 
 Sprinkling of kerosene oil in ditches or other open spaces where water gets collected. 
 Anti-malarial drugs to be administered. 
HEPATITIS 
 Pathogen: Hepatitis B virus.  
 Mode of Transmission: Mainly through contaminated water.  
 Incubation Period: Generally 15-160 days.  
Symptoms 
 Body ache. 
 Loss of appetite and nausea. 
 Eyes and skin become yellowish, urine deep yellow in colour (due to bile pigments). E 
 Enlarged liver.  
Prevention and Cure 
 Hepatitis B vaccine  
 Proper hygiene is to be observed. 
 Avoid taking fat rich substances 
POLIOMYELITIS 
 Pathogen: Polio Virus 
 Mode of transmissions: Virus enters inside the body through food or water. 
 Incubation period: 7-14 days 
Symptoms 
 The virus multiplies in intestinal cells and then reaches the brain through blood. 
 It damages the brain and nerves and causes infantile paralysis. 
 Stiffness of neck, fever, loss of head support. 
Prevention and Cure 
 Polio vaccine drop (oral polio vaccine, OPV) is  given to children at certain intervals. 
PNEUMONIA 
 Pathogen – diplococcus pneumoniae. 
 Incubation period – 1 to 3 days. 
Symptoms 
 Collection lymph and mucus in bronchioles and alveoli. 
 Decrease in the respiratory efficiency of the lungs 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 29 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
28 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
 Other symptoms like fever, coughing, headache and chills. 
 Lips and finger nails become grey to bluish colour. 
 Severe cases, it leads to death. 
Prevention and cures: 
 Isolation of the affected person. 
 Antibiotics like penicillin and flucloxacillin are administered. 
Non- Communicable Diseases 
DIABETES MELLITUS: 
 It is caused due to the less secretion of insulin hormone from the pancreas. 
 It may be either hereditary or acquired. 
 Damage to the beta cells of pancreas that secrete insulin. 
 The disease can be diagnosed by blood test or urine test. 
Symptoms 
 More glucose in blood. 
 Excessive and frequent passing of urine – poly urea.  
 Feeling thirsty– polydipsia 
 Frequent hunger - polyphagia 
 Reduced healing capacity of injury. 
 General weakness of the body.   
Prevention and cure 
 Control the excessive weight of the body.  
 A regulated and controlled diet is to be taken. 
 The food should not contain sugar and much carbohydrates.  
 Injection of insulin before meals, if required. 
CANCER 
 Cancer is the uncontrolled and unwanted growth of cells. 
 Cancer can arise out of a lot of causes like smoking, chewing tobacco etc., 
 Cancer results in tumour growth. 
 These tumours can be of two types, 
 Benign tumour - It remains confined to the place of origin and does not spread to other 
body parts. It is relatively harmless. 
 Malignant tumour - It spreads to other parts of the body and growth is rapid. This is 
serious and may cause death of the patient. 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 30 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
29 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
 Some of the symptoms of cancer are, 
 Continuous bleeding and loss of body weight. 
 Bleeding in menses. 
 Persistent indigestion and persistent changes in bowel movement. 
Causes of cancer 
 Oncogenic transformation, eg – radiation, chemicals. 
 Tumour promoters – eg excessive growth hormones  
 Tumour viruses. 
Detection and diagnosis of cancer: 
 Biopsy 
 Radiography 
 Endoscopy 
 Nuclear medicine scans 
Treatment: 
 Surgery 
 Radiotherapy 
 Chemotherapy 
 Immunotherapy 
Sexually Transmitted Diseases 
AIDS 
 AIDS Is an acronym for Acquired Immune Deficiency Virus. 
 The virus affects the immune system of the body. Thus making it weak. 
 Damages to or destruction of lymphocytes lead to the development of a cellular immune 
deficiency which makes the patient susceptible to a wide variety of infections. 
 As a result, the body catches all possible diseases and results in death. 
 There is no cure for AIDS. 
Mode of transmission:  
 Sexual contact with the affected person. 
 Using the same syringe that was used for the affected person. 
 Blood transfusion which contains human immunodeficiency virus. 
 Organ transplantation of the affected person. 
 Artificial insemination. 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 31 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
30 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
 From mother to newborn baby during the process of giving birth. 
 Incubation period: The average period is 28 months though it may range from 15 to 57 
months. 
Symptoms: 
 A type of lung disease develops (tuberculosis). 
 A skin cancer may be observed. 
 Nerves are affected. 
 Brain is badly damaged with the loss of memory, ability to speak and to think. 
 In severe cases, the patient shows swollen lymph nodes, fever and loss of weight. A full 
blown (disease at its peak) AIDS patient, may die within three years. 
Prevention 
 There should not be any sexual contact with the person who has HIV infection or STI. 
 Use disposable syringe and needle. 
 The blood to be transfused should be free from HIV germ. 
3.6 FOOD SOURCE OF ENERGY FOR MAN 
 Food is any substance consumed to provide nutritional support for an organism. It is usually 
of plant or animal origin 
and 
contains 
essential nutrients, 
such 
as carbohydrates, fats, proteins, vitamins, or minerals.  
 Food is ingested by an organism and assimilated by the organism's cells to provide energy, 
maintain life, or stimulate growth. 
Photosynthesis: 
 Food is initially produced by plants in the process of photosynthesis. 
 It is a chemical process that uses sunlight to turn carbon dioxide into sugars the cell can use 
as energy.  
 As well as plants, many kinds of algae, protists and bacteria use it to get food. 
Photosynthesis is very important for life on Earth. 
 Photosynthesis has two main sets of reactions. Light-dependent reactions need light to 
work; and light-independent reactions, which do not need light to work. 
Light-dependent reactions: 
 The sunlight hits chloroplasts in the plant, causing an enzyme to break apart the water. 
Water, when broken, makes oxygen, hydrogen, and electrons. 
 Hydrogen, along with electrons energized by light, converts NADP into NADPH which is 
then used in the light-independent reactions. 
 Oxygen diffuses out of the plant as a waste product of photosynthesis, and ATP is 
synthesized 
from ADP and inorganic phosphate. 
This 
all 
happens 
in 
the grana of chloroplasts. 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 32 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
31 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
Light-independent reactions 
 During this reaction, sugars are built up using carbon dioxide and the products of the light-
dependent reactions (ATP and NADPH) and various other chemicals found in the plant in 
the process called Calvin Cycle.  
 The light-independent reaction cannot happen without the light-dependent reaction.  
 Glucose is made and finally, transported around the plant by translocation. 
 Food produced by plants is stored in parts of plants like fruits, roots etc., 
3.7 CONSTITUENTS OF FOOD – BALANCED DIET 
Constituents of Food 
 The main components of food are Carbohydrates, Proteins, Fats, Vitamins and Minerals. 
CARBOHYDRATES 
 Carbohydrates are the polyhydroxy organic compounds made up of carbon, hydrogen and 
oxygen. 
 The main sources of carbohydrates are plants, e.g., starch (storage forms carbohydrate of 
chlorophyll containing plants), sugars, cereals, potatoes, legumes, millets, roots and other 
vegetables. Sugars are found in fruits, juice, cane, honey, palm, milk, etc. 
 Carbohydrates may be classified into the following four major groups - 
 Monosaccharides: Simplest form of carbohydrates. All carbohydrates are reduced to 
this state before absorption and utilization. They contain three to six carbon atoms. 
 Disaccharide: Consist of two covalently joined monosaccharide units. They are 
produced as two molecules of the same or different monosaccharides on hydrolysis. e.g., 
lactose, sucrose, maltose etc. 
 Oligosaccharides: Consist of few numbers (2-6) of monosaccharide units e.g., 
glycoproteins. 
 Polysaccharides: Composed of many molecules of monosaccharides linked together. 
e.g., Glycerol. 
Significance of carbohydrates: 
 Starch and glycogen serve as temporary stores of glucose in plants and animals 
respectively. 
 Monosaccharides are important constitute of nucleotides and nucleic acids. 
 Glucose act as energy yielding compounds and is the major fuel of the tissue. 
 Act as intermediates in respiration and carbohydrates metabolism e.g., (trioses). 
 Participate in lipid synthesis. 
Deficiency diseases: 
 Hyperglycemia 
 Galactosemia 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 33 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
32 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
 Diarrhea and flatulence 
 Ketone 
 Underweight. 
PROTEINS 
 Proteins are complex organic compounds. They are macromolecules or bio molecules 
composed of amino acids linked by peptide bond.  
 The constituent elements of proteins are carbon (54%), hydrogen (7%), nitrogen (16%), 
oxygen (22%) and some may contain sulpher (1%) or phosphorus (0.6%). 
 E.g., hemoglobin, albumin, globulin, enzymes, etc. 
Function of proteins: 
 Proteins as enzymes, hormones, growth factors, hormone receptors and transporters. 
 Act as the defense against infections in the form of antibodies, form blood clots through 
thrombin, fibrinogen and other protein factors, absorb or refract light and transport 
substances from one part of the body to another. 
 Maintain colloidal osmotic pressure of blood. 
 They perform hereditary transmission by nucleoproteins of the cell nucleus. 
Deficiency diseases: 
 Kwashiorkor (Protein malnutrition) 
 Marasmic  
 Nephrosis 
VITAMINS 
 Vitamins may be defined as organic compounds occurring in small quantities in different 
natural foods and necessary for the growth and maintenance of good health in human 
beings and certain experimental animals. 
 They cannot be synthesized in the body, but supplied by the diet to the human body.  
 Vitamins are classified into two groups. 
 Fat-soluble vitamins are soluble in fats and fat solvents. They are insoluble in water. So 
these are utilized only if there is enough fat in the body, e.g., vitamin A, D, E and K. 
 Water-soluble vitamins are soluble in water and so they cannot be stored in the body. 
11 types of vitamins are included in this class, e.g., thiamine, riboflavin, pyridoxine, 
cyanocobalamin. 
Vitamin Deficiency: 
 A Deficiency of one or more nutrients can cause diseases or disorders in our body. Diseases 
that occur due to lack of nutrients over a long period are called deficiency diseases. 
 Vitamin A - Night blindness 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 34 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
33 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
 Vitamin B1 - Beriberi 
 Vitamin B2 - Ariboflavinosis 
 Vitamin B3 - Pellagra 
 Vitamin B5 - Paresthesia 
 Vitamin B6 - Anemia 
 Vitamin B7 - Dermatitis, enteritis 
 Vitamin B9 & Vitamin B12 – Megaloblastic, anemia 
 Vitamin C - Scurvy, Swelling of Gums 
 Vitamin D - Rickets & Osteomalacia 
 Vitamin E - Less Fertility 
 Vitamin K - Non-Clotting of Blood. 
MINERALS: 
 Minerals are inorganic substances that serve a variety of functions. 
 Each mineral is required in specific amounts. Some of the more important of these are 
calcium, phosphorus, sodium, potassium and iron. 
 Minerals may be divided arbitrarily into 2 groups. 
 Macro minerals: The minerals, which are required in amounts greater than 100 mg/ day. 
 Micro minerals: The minerals, which are required in amounts less than 100 mg/ day. 
MACRO MINERALS: 
 Calcium: Milk, egg, leafy green vegetable, fish, meat soybeans etc. Formation of bones and 
teeth structure. Activates ATP during muscular contraction, helps in blood clotting and 
capillary permeability. 
 Phosphorus: Milk, peas, meat, fish, eggs, cottage, cheese, almonds, wheat germ, 
soybeans, black beans etc. Synthesis of nucleic acid, ATP and some protein. Helps in 
calcification of bones, maintain a buffer system in body and bone formation. 
 Potassium: Spinach, butter, beans, oranges, milk, peas, meat, fruits nuts, and vegetables. 
Involves the transmission of nervous impulses chemical reactions and acid base balance in 
the body. 
 Sodium: Table salt, eggs, meat, milk, cheese, butter, margarine, bacon, etc. Form part of 
tissue fluids inducing blood, involves kidney functioning and transmission of nervous 
impulses, acid-base balance in the body. 
 Sulphur: meat, fish and milk. In synthesis of proteins e.g., Keratin and many other organic 
compounds e.g., coenzymes A. Micro minerals : 
 Iron: Liver, eggs, meat, dark and green vegetables, lentils, potatoes, soybeans, chick peas, 
black beans, spinach, etc. Forms part of haemoglobin, helps in electron transport in 
biochemical reactions. 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 35 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
34 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
 Fluorine: Water, milk etc. Needed for strong enamel on teeth, as calcium deposit in bone. 
 Nitrogen: Protein e.g., meat, fish and milk, Synthesis of protein NA and many other organic 
compounds, e.g., coenzymes and chlorophyll. 
 Manganese: Vegetables and most other foods; Bone development (a growth factor). 
 Cobalt: Liver and red meat; Red blood cell development 
 Copper: Most foods; Melanin production 
 Zinc: Most foods; CO2 transport in vertebrate blood. 
 Molybdenum: Most foods; Hydrolysis of peptide bonds in protein digestion. 
Mineral deficiency diseases: 
 Nitrogen-kwashiorkor. 
 Sodium-muscular cramps, giddiness, anorexia, scanty urine, dry mouth, inelastic skin and 
disorientation. 
 Chlorine-muscular cramps, renal disease etc. 
 Calcium-poor skeletal growth, rickets in children, osteomalacea in adults. 
 Manganese-poor bone development 
 Iron-anaemia, weakness, lethargy, brittle nails, koilonychia, palpitations, breathlessness etc. 
 Zinc-poor appetite, mental lethargy and delayed wound healing etc. 
 Cobalt-pernicious anaemia, 
 Fluorine-dental caries 
 Iodine-goitre, cretinism in children 
 Potassium-muscular weakness, paralysis, mental confusion, loss of appetite, nausea, 
abdominal distension. 
 Phosphorus-rickets in children, osteomalacia in adults. 
Balanced Diet 
 A Balanced diet can be defined as one which contains different types of foods in such 
quantities and proportions that the need for calories, minerals, vitamins and other nutrients is 
adequately met. 
 The balanced diet varies in accordance with the requirements of age, sex, the constitution of 
the body, the type of work and climatic conditions. 
  Generally, a person requires about 3000 calories of heat energy in order to maintain the 
proper function of the body. 
 These calories should be given by a proper combination of food elements.  
 Most often proteins, fats and carbohydrates are of the proportion of 1: 1: 3. 
 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 36 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
35 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
Significance of Balanced diet: 
 Prevent heart disease, high blood pressure, type 2 diabetes and many types of cancer. 
 Eating a balanced diet also can help humans feel healthier and have more energy. 
 It boosts the immune system too. 
3.8 SOLAR SYSTEM – METEORS,    COMETS 
Solar system 
 A solar system is a name given to the system of a star and planets revolving around it. 
 Our own solar system, with the sun at its center, has 8 planets, asteroids and a minor planet 
belt. 
 They all move in elliptical orbits around the sun due to its force of gravitational attraction. 
The Sun: 
 The sun lies in the center of the Solar System. 
 It is a yellow dwarf star with a surface temperature of approximately 6000°C. 
 Diameter – 865,000 miles. 
 By mass, the sun is made up of 71% Hydrogen, 28% Helium and the remaining 1% mass 
comprising heavier atoms such as Carbon, Nitrogen, Oxygen, Silicon and Iron and its total 
mass accounts for 99% mass of our solar system. 
The planets: 
 The planets are divided into the two groups - Inner planets and Outer planets. 
 Inner planets - Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars. These are also known as terrestrial planets or 
rocky planets.  
 Outer planets - Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune. These are also known as Gas Giants or 
Gaseous planets. 
Mercury: 
 Closest planet to the sun 
 Smallest of all planets 
 Diameter – 3000 miles. 
 Rotation – 59 days 
 Revolution – 88 days. 
Venus: 
 Hottest planet of solar system – average 460oC. 
 Diameter – 12100 km 
 Rotation – 243 days 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 37 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
36 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
 Revolution- 225 days. 
Earth: 
 Only planet that carries life. 
 Diameter – 12756 Km 
 Revolution – 365.25 days 
Mars: 
 Red planet. 
 Two moons – Phobos and Deimos. 
 Diameter – 6800 Km 
 Revolution – 687 days 
 Rotation – 24 hours 39 minutes.‘ 
 Has the largest known volcano (and second tallest mountain) in the solar system – Mons 
Olympus. 
Jupiter: 
 Largest planet in the solar system 
 An asteroid belt lies between Mars and Jupiter. 
 Have 67 moons. Notable – Ganymede (largest moon), Europa, lo, Callisto. 
 Diameter – 143,000 km 
 Rotation – 9 hours 55 min 
 Revolution – 11.9 years. 
 It is huge gaseous planet mainly composed of hydrogen and helium. 
Saturn: 
 Second largest planet in solar system. 
 Diameter – 120,500 Km 
 Revolution – 30 years. 
 Rotation – 10.8 hours. 
 Saturn‘s most famous feature is its ring system. 
 It has 50 moons. 
Uranus: 
 3rd largest planet. 
 Diameter – 51,000 km 
 Rotation – 17 hours 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 38 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
37 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
 Revolution – 84 years. 
 It has 27 moons. 
Neptune: 
 Neptune is the eighth and farthest most planets from the sun and cannot be seen by the 
unaided eye. 
 Diameter – 50000 Km 
 Revolution – 146 years. 
 Rotation – 16 hours. 
 Its atmosphere mainly comprises of hydrogen and helium with methane (2%) 
 Methane gives a blue colour to the planet. 
 6 narrow rings 
 It has 13 moons. 
Asteroids: 
 These are rocky substances like planets but much smaller in size. 
 They revolve around the sun, mainly in the asteroid belt. 
 Largest asteroid – Ceres. 
Pluto: 
 Was initially a planet – 9th planet. 
 But was changed status to dwarf planet. 
 Inspite of its size, it has 5 moons. 
Meteorites: 
 Meteors are formed due to the collisions between asteroids. 
  They are fragments of rocks floating about in space.  
 Sometimes they come across the earth and fall into the earth‘s atmosphere. That‘s when 
they become meteors or ―shooting stars‖.  
 Most of these meteors can‘t reach the earth‘s surface and burn up in the atmosphere due to 
the friction with the air.  
 The meteors that do reach the earth‘s surface are known as meteorites. 
Comets: 
 Comets are tiny icy and rocky bodies that travel in highly elliptical orbits around the sun. 
 When they pass close to the sun, the water in them gets heated up. 
 This leads to the vapourisation and the formation of a tail behind the rocky core in the 
direction opposite to the sun.  
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 39 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
38 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
 The most famous comet is Halley‘s Comet which reappears every 75-76 years. 
3.9 ACHIEVEMENTS OF EMINENT SCIENTISTS 
 Archimedes (287 BCE– 212 BCE): Archimedes of Syracuse was an ancient Greek 
mathematician, physicist, engineer, inventor, and astronomer. Amongst other things he 
calculated pi and developed the Archimedes law and a screw for lifting up water from mines 
or wells. 
 Galileo (1564–1642): Italian scientist. Galileo developed a powerful telescope and 
confirmed revolutionary theories about the nature of the world. Also developed an improved 
compass. 
 Sir Isaac Newton (1642–1726): English scientist. Newton invented the reflecting telescope. 
This greatly improved the capacity of telescopes and reduced optical distortion. Newton was 
also a great physicist and astronomer. 
 Benjamin Franklin (1705–1790): American polymath who discovered electricity and 
invented the Franklin stove, the lightning rod and bifocals.  
 James Watt (1736–1819) Scottish inventor of the steam engine, which was suitable for use 
in trains. His invention of a separate condensing chamber greatly improved the efficiency of 
steam. It enabled the steam engine to be used for a greater range of purpose than just 
pumping water. 
 Charles Babbage (1791–1871) English mathematician and inventor. Babbage created the 
first mechanical computer, which proved to be the prototype for future computers. 
Considered to be the ‗Father of Computers‘. 
 Thomas Edison (1847–1931) American inventor who filed over 1,000 patents. He 
developed and innovated a wide range of products from the electric light bulb to the 
phonograph and motion picture camera. One of the greatest inventors of all time. 
 Marie Curie (1867–1934) Polish born French chemist and physicist. Curie discovered 
Radium and helped make use of radiation and X-rays. 
 Alexander Fleming (1881–1955), Scottish scientist. Fleming discovered the antibiotic 
penicillin by accident from the mould Penicillium notatum in 1928. 
 Antonie van Leeuwenhoek – known as the father of microbiology (1632–1723). 
Leeuwenhoek is well known for his contributions to microscopy, and how he applied this to 
the field of biology. He revolutionised a technique for creating powerful lenses, which some 
speculate were able to magnify up to 500 times 
 Carl Linnaeus (1707–1775), known as the father of modern taxonomy. A botanist, physician 
and zoologist all at the same time, Linnaeus came up with the system of naming, ranking, 
and classifying organisms that we still use today. 
 Gregor Mendel ((1822–1884) – the founder of modern genetics. Mendel used peas to 
discover and demonstrate the laws of genetic inheritance, coining the terms dominant and 
recessive genes in the process. 
 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 40 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
39 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
Eminent Indian Scientists 
 
Srinivasa Ramanujan (1887–1920): Mathematician known for his brilliant contributions to 
contributions to mathematical analysis, number theory, infinite series and continued fractions. 
 C.V. Raman (1888 – 1970) - Physicist who won Nobel Prize in 1930 for his Raman Effect 
 Jagadish Chandra Bose (1858 to 1937) - Physicist, biologist and archaeologist who 
pioneered the investigation of radio and microwave optics. 
 Har Gobind Khorana (1922–2011) - Biochemist who won the Nobel Prize in 1968 for 
demonstrating how the nucleotides in nucleic acids control the synthesis of proteins. 
 Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar (1910– 1995) - Astrophysicist won the Nobel Prize in 1983 
for his research on the evolutionary stages of massive stars. 
 
Facts Table 
 
 Living things – Complex organisation 
of molecules that perform biological 
functions. 
 Non-living things – Made up of 
atoms and do not perform biological 
functions. 
 Cell wall and Plastids are found only 
in plant cell. 
 Plasma 
membrane 
– 
A 
semi-
permeable membrane surrounding 
the protoplasm of cell. It is found in 
both plant and animal cells. 
 Mitochondria 
is 
the 
organ 
of 
respiration in cells. It is also known 
as powerhouse of cells 
 Prokaryotes – Primitive single celled 
organism. 
Eukaryotes 
– 
well 
developed and complex organisms 
mostly multicellular. 
 Protoplasm is the living physical basis 
of life. They are living parts of a cell. 
 DNA is the genetic material of most 
organisms. RNA is the genetic 
material of some viruses. 
 Epigeal germination – cotyledons 
rise above the soil surface. Hypogeal 
germination – Cotyledons remain 
below the soil surface. 
 Vernalisation is the acceleration of 
flowering in plants by subjecting 
them to low temperatures. 
 Mitosis 
occurs 
in 
asexual 
reproduction. Meiosis is concerned 
with sexual reproduction. 
 Internal Fertilization – Fertilisation of 
gametes occur inside the female 
body. 
 External fertilisation – Fertilisation of 
gametes occur outside female body. 
 Appendix is a narrow finger-like tubular 
projection at the junction of small and 
large intestines. 
 Endocrine 
glands 
secrete 
various 
hormones and controls various functions 
of the body. 
 The pituitary gland is called the master 
Endocrine gland because it controls other 
endocrine glands. 
 Nephrons are the functional units of the 
kidney. Neurons are the functional units 
of the brain. 
 When the heart contracts, it is called 
systole. When it relaxes it is called 
Diastole. 
 The heart beats are controlled by two 
pacemakers: Sino auricular node and 
Sino ventricular node. 
 A balanced diet is one which contains all 
the necessary nutrients in the correct 
proportion. 
 Jupiter has most moon – 67 moon. 
Ganymede - largest moon. 
 Mercury, Venus, Earth and Mars are 
terrestrial planets (Earth like – rocky). 
 Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune are 
Jovian planets (Jupiter like – gaseous). 
 Most of the asteroids in our solar system 
are found in the asteroid belt between 
Mars and Jupiter. 
 Haley‘s comet is the most famous comet 
that appears every 75 to 76 years. 
 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 41 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
40 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
GENERAL SCIENCE: MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS WITH ANSWER AND 
EXPLANATION 
 
GENERAL SCIENCE - PHYSICS 
 
1. Which of the following measurements is not a unit of distance?   
[A] Ammeter  
[B] Cubit  
[C] Parsec  
[D] Angstrom 
Answer: [A] Ammeter  
 
2. Which one of the following remains constant while throwing a ball upward?   
[A] Displacement  
[B] Kinetic energy  
[C] Acceleration  
[D] Velocity 
Answer: [C] Acceleration  
 
3. Pure water freezes at what temperature?   
[A] 47 F  
[B] 32 F  
[C] 0 F  
[D] 19 F 
Answer: B. 32 F  
 
4. Which vitamin is abundant in citrus fruits?   
[A]. Vitamin A  
[B]. Vitamin B  
[C]. Vitamin C  
[D]. Vitamin D 
Answer: [C]. Vitamin C  
 
5. Zinc Oxide is   
A.  Acidic  
B.  Basic  
C.  Neutral  
D.  Amphoteric 
Answer: D. Amphoteric 
 
6. Which of the following statements is not true regarding LASER? 
[A] A LASER is a device that emits light through a process of optical amplification . 
[B] LASER beams can be focused to very tiny spots, achieving a very high irradiance. 
[C] The emitted LASER light is notable for its high degree of dispersive power unattainable 
using other technologies. 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 42 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
41 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
[D] LASER light is used in bar-code scanners 
Answer: C [The emitted LASER light is notable for its high degree of dispersive power 
unattainable using other technologies.]- The emitted laser light is notable for its high degree 
of spatial and temporal coherence, unattainable using other technologies. 
 
7. If a moving body turns its speed to 1.5 times, what will be the impact on its kinetic energy? 
[A] will become 1.5 times 
[B] will become 3 times 
[C] will become 2.25 times 
[D] will become 6 times 
Answer: C [will become 2.25 times]- Kinetic Energy is a product of half the Mass times 
Velocity Squared. When the velocity is doubled, the Kinetic energy would go up four times. If 
velocity is tripled, kinetic energy would go up nine times. If velocity is increased by 1.5 times the 
Kinetic energy would go up by 1.5×1.5=2.25 times. 
 
8. Two Flat mirrors are placed at an angle of 60° from each other. How many images will be 
formed of a Candle placed in between them? 
[A] 3 
[B] 4 
[C] 5 
[D] 6 
Answer: C [5] 
 
9. A tourist, who plans to visit a hill station located at very high altitude also wishes to take along 
his Television Set. In this context, consider the following: 
LCD TV 
Plasma TV 
Cathode Ray Tube TV 
Which among the above are expected to work properly at very high altitudes? 
[A] Only 1 
[B] 1 & 2 
[C] 1 & 3 
[D] 2 & 3 
Answer: C [1 & 3] 
 
10. If an egg with shell is placed in a microwave oven, which among the following would most 
likely happen? 
[A] The egg will not get warmed 
[B] The egg will get cooked slowly similar to a boiled egg 
[C] The egg shell will explode 
[D] The egg shell becomes yellow 
Answer: C [The egg shell will explode] 
 
11. Which among the following is the SI physical unit of dynamic viscosity? 
[A] Poise 
[B] Pascal-second 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 43 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
42 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
[C] Newton-second 
[D] Poise-second 
Answer: B [Pascal-second] 
 
12. Which among the following phenomena of the optics makes the Endoscopy capable of 
examining the internal organs such as Abdomen? 
[A] Interference  
[B] Total Internal Reflection 
[C] Diffraction 
[D] Scattering 
Answer: B [Total Internal Reflection] 
 
13. An antenna in a Geostationary satellite should have a minimum beam width of which among 
the following values to cover the entire earth? 
[A] 8.56° 
[B] 17.34° 
[C] 22.16° 
[D] 23.25° 
Answer: B [17.34°]- The Geosynchronous satellite is located at 35865 kilometers away from 
earth. The global or earth coverage antenna should have a beam width of 17.34° to cover the 
entire earth. 
 
14. A piece of Ice was tied with a string to a water bucket‘s bottom, and the water bucket was 
filled with water with ice fully submerged in it. What would be the impact on the level of water 
when the ice melts away completely? 
[A] The level of water will go up 
[B] The level of water will go down 
[C] The level of water will remain unchanged 
[D] The level of water will first increase then come to the previous on 
Answer: B [The level of water will go down]- There are two dimensions of this experiment. 
One is when Ice floats in water and another is as mentioned in the question. When Ice floats in 
water, the level of water will remain unchanged when the ice melts away because in this 
situation, Ice replaced water which is `equal to its weight`. But when the floating ice is taken 
down in the bottom of the bucket and tied over there with a string, and let melt away, the level of 
water will come down because now the ice was replacing the water `equal to its volume `and 
Ice has a lower density of water. So The answer of this question is -The level of water will go 
down. 
 
15. A ―Charge-coupled device‖ in the modern Digital Cameras has replaced which among the 
following in the traditional Cameras? 
[A] Lens 
[B] Shutter 
[C] Photographic film 
[D] Flash equipment 
Answer: C [Photographic film] 
 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 44 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
43 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
16. An instrument called ―Theodolite‖ is used in which among the following ? 
[A] Measuring distances, elevations, bearings etc. 
[B] Measuring rotational speed of a shaft 
[C] Measuring horizontal and vertical angles in triangular networks 
[D] Measuring acidity or alkalinity of solutions 
Answer: C [Measuring horizontal and vertical angles in triangular networks] 
 
17. A person is standing in front of a wall and makes a sound. What should be the normal 
minimum distance between the person and the wall , so that the person hears echo? 
[A] 6 meters 
[B] 13 meters 
[C] 20 meters 
[D] 17 meters 
Answer: D [17 meters] 
 
18. A long Rail (approximately 700 meters) made up of steel is struck to produce a sound. The 
person standing on the other end of the rail would hear in which among the following pattern? 
[A] He listens the sound waves once propagated via steel 
[B] He listens the sound waves once propagated via air 
[C] He listens the sound waves twice, first propagated via steel and second propagated via air 
[D] He listens the sound waves twice, first propagated via air and second propagated via steel 
Answer: C [He listens the sound waves twice, first propagated via steel and second 
propagated via air] 
 
19. Which among the following is studied under ‖ fulminology‖? 
[A] Sudden changes in atmosphere 
[B] Lightning 
[C] Cloudbursts 
[D] Volcanic Eruptions 
Answer: B [Lightning] 
 
20. Which among the following has the lowest frequency Range? 
[A] L-Band 
[B] S-Band 
[C] C-Band 
[D] X-Band 
Answer: A [L-Band] 
 
21. How does the Isotope of Iodine, Iodine-135 plays an important role in Nuclear Power 
Generation? 
[A] It is used as a fuel supplement in some of the modern Nuclear Reactors 
[B] It is a bi-product of Nuclear Reaction which kills the neutrons and this inhibits the power 
formation 
[C] It is a moderator used actively in the Nuclear Reactors 
[D] It is an experimental substance for Nuclear Fusion 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 45 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
44 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
Answer: B [It is a bi-product of Nuclear Reaction which kills the neutrons and this 
inhibits the power formation] 
 
22. Which among the following is the correct statement about Black Ice? 
[A] It is the product of the freezing of water droplets in highly polluted air 
[B] It is the thin transparent layer of ice made up usually on roads and pavement 
[C] It is the solid Carbon Dioxide 
[D] It is the frozen water of a highly polluted river 
Answer: B [It is the thin transparent layer of ice made up usually on roads and pavement] 
 
23. In many countries with cold climates, the municipalities often sprinkle salt on icy roads in 
winter.  
Which among the following is the correct reason for this? 
[A] The Salt inhibits the formation of Ice Crystals 
[B] The Salt lowers the Freezing Point of water  
[C] The Salt raises the freezing Point of water  
[D] The salt provides necessary friction to the tires of the vehicles 
Answer: B [The Salt lowers the Freezing Point of water ] 
 
24. Consider the following:  
1. Near Infrared  
2. Mid Infrared  
3. Far Infrared 
Which among the following is the correct order of increasing wavelength of the above? 
[A] 1,2,3 
[B] 3,2,1 
[C] 2,1,3 
[D] 3,1,2 
Answer: A [1,2,3] 
 
25. Which among the following is measured by an Odometer? 
[A] Pressure 
[B] Height 
[C] Distance 
[D] Velocity 
Answer: C [Distance] 
 
26. The term ―Isopycnic‖ is most closely defined by which among the following? 
[A] Two places with same atmospheric pressure 
[B] Two liquids with same viscosity 
[C] Two liquids with same density 
[D] Two places with same temperature 
Answer: C [Two liquids with same density] 
 
 
 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 46 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
45 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
27. Which among the following property of the matter is studied in ―Rheology‖? 
[A] Gravitation 
[B] Viscosity 
[C] Magnetic Properties 
[D] Entropy 
Answer: B [Viscosity] 
 
28. ―Fermi‖ is a unit of which among the following? 
[A] Mass 
[B] Length 
[C] Velocity 
[D] Frequency 
Answer: B [Length] 
 
29. Which among the following correctly represents a Parsec? 
[A] 0.326 Light Years 
[B] 3.261 Light Years 
[C] 32.61 Light Years 
[D] 3.026 Light Years 
Answer: B [3.261 Light Years] 
 
30. Consider the following:  
1. 
Submarine Communications 
2. 
AM Radio  
3. 
Short Wave Radio  
4. 
Radar  
Arrange the above in increasing frequency of the waves used in their applications. 
[A] 4 3 2 1 
[B] 1 2 3 4 
[C] 2 1 4 3 
[D] 2 3 4 1 
Answer: B [1 2 3 4] 
 
31. Consider the following advantages of the Optic Fibers and the Copper wires:  
Optic Fibers are NOT susceptible to the electrical interference  
Optic Fibers can be used to transmit more signals that Copper Wires  
Optic Fibers can carry a signal over a single fiber, unlike the electricity which requires a pair of 
Copper wires.  
Which among the above stand correct ? 
[A] Only 1 is correct 
[B] Only 1 & 2 are correct 
[C] All 1, 2 & 3 are correct 
[D] Only 3 is correct 
Answer: C [All 1, 2 & 3 are correct] 
 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 47 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
46 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
32. The power we use at Home has a frequency of 60Hz. What would be the period of the sine 
wave? 
[A] 0.116 seconds 
[B] 0.0116 seconds 
[C] 0.00116 secon 
[D] 0.0016 Microseconds 
Answer: B [0.0116 seconds] 
 
33. What do we call the part of the ―DTH Satellite dish‖ that converts the signals from 
electromagnetic or radio waves to electrical signals ? 
[A] Orthomode transducer (OMT) 
[B] Low-noise block converter (LNB) 
[C] Block upconverter (BUC) 
[D] Parabolic Dish 
Answer: B [Low-noise block converter (LNB)] 
 
34. Which among the following waves are used in the gemstone industry to change white topaz 
into blue topaz? 
[A] X-Rays 
[B] Gamma Rays 
[C] Alpha Radiation 
[D] Beta Radiation 
Answer: B [Gamma Rays] 
 
35. Which among the following waves are most commonly used in the Night Vision Devices? 
[A] Microwaves 
[B] Infra Red Waves 
[C] Ultra Violet Waves 
[D] Radio Waves 
Answer: B [Infra Red Waves] 
 
36. Which among the following strictly works on the principle of dipole movement of the water 
molecules? 
[A] Refrigerator 
[B] Microwave Oven 
[C] Air Conditioner 
[D] Electric Geyser 
Answer: B [Microwave Oven] 
 
37. Which among the following is the most common cause of Sunburn? 
[A] Ultraviolet Radiation 
[B] Visible Radiation 
[C] Infrared Radiation 
[D] Microwave Radiation 
Answer: A [Ultraviolet Radiation] 
 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 48 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
47 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
38. One Torr is equivalent to how many mm of Mercury? 
[A] 1 mm 
[B] 10 mm 
[C] 100 mm 
[D] 0.1 mm 
Answer: A [1 mm] 
 
39. ―Svedberg Unit‖ is a unit of _________? 
[A] Concentration 
[B] Size 
[C] Density 
[D] Time 
Answer: D [Time] 
 
40. A vehicle moving on a circular path experiences ________? 
[A] centripetal force 
[B] centrifugal force 
[C] gravitational force 
[D] None of the above 
Answer: A [centripetal force] 
 
41. At which of the following places water shall boil at the lowest temperature? 
[A] Kochi 
[B] ooty 
[C] Mount Abu 
[D] New Delhi 
Answer: B [ooty]- This question is related to Antoine equation. Water to get boil, its vapour 
pressure must reach to its surrounding pressure. In a pressure cooker, it boils at the highest 
temperature. Elevation of Kochi is 0 m, ooty is 2,486 m, Mount Abu is 1,200 m, New Delhi is 
216 m, Shimla is 2,205 m. So comparing all of them, water will boil at lowest temperature at 
ooty, followed by Shimla, Mount Abu , New Delhi and Kochi. This is because , higher we go 
lower is the atmospheric pressure and lower is the point where water`s vapour pressure gets 
equal to the atmospheric pressure. 
 
42. In which year, Sir Chandrasekhara Venkata Raman was awarded Nobel Prize for Raman effect? 
[A] 1927 
[B] 1929 
[C] 1930 
[D] 1932 
Answer: C [1930] 
 
43. Which among the following are used in Computed tomography (CT) Scan? 
[A] X-Rays 
[B] Ultrasound 
[C] Infrared waves 
[D] Radio Waves 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 49 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
48 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
Answer: A [X-Rays] 
 
44. Which among the following instruments used in Forensic Sciences is popular as Lie 
detector? 
[A] SmartWater 
[B] Culpascope 
[C] Polygraph 
[D] Bio Sensor 
Answer: C [Polygraph] 
 
45. Which among the following component of a fluorescent lamp contributes maximum in 
making them costly? 
[A] Mercury vapor 
[B] Light-emitting phosphors 
[C] Ballast 
[D] Filament 
Answer: C [Ballast] 
 
46. An electrical fuse is used to interrupt excessive________? 
[A] Voltage 
[B] Current 
[C] Resistance 
[D] Inductance 
Answer: B [Current] 
 
47. In context with electromagnetism, which among the following is a correct definition of 
Permeability? 
[A] Ability of a material to repel magnetic field within itself 
[B] Ability of a material to support the formation of a magnetic field within another body 
[C] Ability of a material to support the formation of a magnetic field within itself 
[D] Ability of a material to create magnetic dipoles 
Answer: C [Ability of a material to support the formation of a magnetic field within itself] 
 
48. The following is measured in tonne of oil equivalent (toe) ? 
[A] Volume of Oil 
[B] Energy released by burning of oil 
[C] Demand of Crude oil at a point of time 
[D] Oil production capacity of a country 
Answer: B [Energy released by burning of oil]- amount of energy released by burning one 
tonne of crude oil, approximately 42 GJ 
 
49. Who among the following coined the term ―cosmic rays‖ ? 
[A] Henri Becquerel 
[B] Theodor Wulf 
[C] Robert Millikan 
[D] Bruno Rossi 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 50 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
49 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
Answer: C [Robert Millikan] 
 
50. Which among the following is the most acceptable range of LEO (Low Earth orbit)? 
[A] 350 – 2,600 kms 
[B] 200-2000 kms 
[C] 160 – 2,000 kms 
[D] 160-1600 kms 
Answer: C [160 – 2,000 kms] 
 
51. Which among the following is a Beyond-visual-range air-to-air missile  
[A] Agni 
[B] Prithvi 
[C] Astra 
[D] Nag 
Answer: C [Astra]- Agni is family of Medium to Intercontinental range ballistic missiles, Prithvi 
is tactical surface-to-surface, short-range ballistic missile (SRBM), Akash is medium range 
surface-to-air missile, Nag is a third generation―Fire-and-forget― anti-tank missile 
 
52. Who was the first scientist to be awarded two Nobel Prizes? 
[A] Linus Pauling 
[B] Frederick Sanger 
[C] Marie Curie 
[D] John Bardeen 
Answer: C [Marie Curie] 
 
53. A small quantity of water is placed in a small cavity made in a block of Ice at 0 degree 
centigrade. Which of the following will happen? 
[A] the temperature of water will become zero and it will freeze 
[B] the temperature of water will become zero but it will not freeze 
[C] the temperature of the water will become zero and it will come out of the cavity 
[D] the temperature of the water will become zero and ice will melt to merge with water 
Answer: B [the temperature of water will become zero but it will not freeze] 
 
54. Ultrasound which is upper limit of human hearing is characterized by which of the following 
frequencies? 
[A] Above 20 KHz 
[B] Above 200 KHz 
[C] Above 2 KHz 
[D] Below 20 KHz 
Answer: A [Above 20 KHz] 
 
55. What is the normal temperature of human being on Kelvin scale? 
[A] 290 
[B] 300 
[C] 310 
[D] 320 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 51 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
50 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
Answer: C [310] 
 
56. Which among the following is known as first electronic amplification device? 
[A] Diode 
[B] Triode Vaccum Tubes 
[C] Vacuum Tubes 
[D] bipolar transistors 
Answer: B [Triode Vaccum Tubes] 
 
57. Which among the following temperature scale is based upon absolute zero? 
[A] Celsius 
[B] Fahrenheit 
[C] Kelvin 
[D] Rankine 
Answer: C [Kelvin] 
 
58. Which of the following is an instrument for measuring electric charge or electrical potential 
difference? 
[A] Ammeter 
[B] Voltmeter 
[C] Electrometer 
[D] ohmmeter 
Answer: C [Electrometer] 
 
59. Edwin Howard Armstrong was an inventor of which of the following technologies? 
[A] Television 
[B] Compact Discs 
[C] FM Radio 
[D] Broadband 
Answer: C [FM Radio] 
 
60. Parallax of one arc second‖ is a unit of which of the following? 
[A] Time 
[B] Volume 
[C] Length 
[D] Speed 
Answer: C [Length]- Its is parsec which is a unit of length, equal to some 31 trillion kilometers, 
used in astronomical distances. 
 
61. Which among the following comes under the study area of Psychrometrics? 
[A] Relative Humidity 
[B] physical and thermodynamic properties of gas-vapor mixtures 
[C] theory and technique of educational and psychological measurement 
[D] Atmospheric Pressure at Colder Regions of the World 
Answer: B [physical and thermodynamic properties of gas-vapor mixtures] 
 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 52 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
51 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
62. Ballistics is a branch of science that deals with which of the following? 
[A] Geologic study of the behavior of soil and rock 
[B] Motion of multibody systems subjected to unilateral contacts and friction 
[C] Flight, behavior, and effects of projectiles 
[D] Kinetic energy of a system 
Answer: C [Flight, behavior, and effects of projectiles] 
 
63. SOFAR is a phenomenon which plays an important role in submarine warfare & also known 
as deep sound channel. Which of the following is correct full form of SOFAR? 
[A] Sound Field Radio Ranging 
[B] Sound Fixing and Altering Range 
[C] Sound Fixing and Ranging channel 
[D] Sound Fixing and Auto Reflection 
Answer: C [Sound Fixing and Ranging channel] 
 
64. By which of the following process some stars which are of the size of Sun or smaller convert 
hydrogen to helium? 
[A] Triple-alpha process 
[B] Proton Proton Chain Reaction 
[C] CNO Cycle 
[D] R process 
Answer: B [Proton Proton Chain Reaction] 
 
65. Fermi-Kurie plot is used for the study of which of the following? 
[A] Alpha Decay 
[B] Beta Decay 
[C] Internal Conversion 
[D] Cluster Decay 
Answer: B [Beta Decay] 
 
66. Which among the following denotes the correct usage of an instrument called ―Theodolite‖? 
[A] Measures distances, elevations, bearings etc 
[B] Measures rotational speed of a shaft 
[C] Measures horizontal and vertical angles in triangular networks 
[D] Measures acidity or alkalinity of solutions 
Answer: C [Measures horizontal and vertical angles in triangular networks] 
 
67. Which among the following is the science dealing with Colors? 
[A] Optics 
[B] Chromatics 
[C] Ophthalmology 
[D] Otology 
Answer: B [Chromatics] 
 
68. Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER) project is located at? 
[A] Italy 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 53 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
52 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
[B] France 
[C] Germany 
[D] China 
Answer: B [France] 
 
69. Mach number‖ is a measure of which of the following? 
[A] Speed 
[B] Heat Transfer 
[C] Static Pressure 
[D] Volume 
Answer: A [Speed] 
 
70. Radiation hardening is used in design of artificial satellites, spacecraft, military aircraft, 
nuclear power stations, and nuclear weapons for which of the following purposes? 
[A] Protection from radiation damage 
[B] trace element analysis 
[C] use radiation energy 
[D] Increase resistance 
Answer: A [Protection from radiation damage] 
 
71. Newton-meters per second is represented as follows? 
[A] Ohm 
[B] Volt 
[C] Watt 
[D] Calorie 
Answer: C [Watt]- one watt is the rate at which work is done when an object is moved at a 
speed of one meter per second against a force of one Newton. 
 
72. Most part of the Cosmic rays that impinge on earth‘s atmosphere are __? 
[A] Electrons 
[B] Protons 
[C] Neutrons 
[D] Gamma rays 
Answer: B [Protons]- Almost 90% of all the incoming cosmic ray particles are protons, almost 
10% are helium nuclei (alpha particles), and slightly under 1% are heavier elements and 
electrons (beta minus particles) 
 
73. Which among the following statement is correct about Fluorescence? 
[A] High Energy Photon is absorbed and low energy photon is emitted 
[B] Low Energy Photon is absorbed and high energy photon is emitted 
[C] High Energy Photon is absorbed and electron is emitted 
[D] Low Energy Photon is absorbed and electron is emitted 
Answer: C [High Energy Photon is absorbed and electron is emitted] 
 
 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 54 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
53 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
74. The combination of a Red Glass Plate and a Blue Glass plate will transmit which of the 
following light? 
[A] Red light 
[B] Blue Light 
[C] Green Light 
[D] No Light 
Answer: D [No Light] 
 
75. VIBGYOR (Violet Indigo Blue Green Yellow Orange Red) are the rainbow colors in which of 
the following order? 
[A] Increasing wavelength 
[B] Decreasing wavelength 
[C] Increasing polarization 
[D] Increasing Speed 
Answer: A [Increasing wavelength] 
 
76. Moon Mineralogy Mapper (M3) is an instruments providing the first high-resolution spatial 
and spectral map of the entire lunar surface to India‘s first mission to the Moon Chandrayan -1 
launched 22 October 2008. It was contributed by __? 
[A] National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) 
[B] Soviet space program 
[C] Israel Space Agency 
[D] National Aerospace Laboratory, US 
Answer: A [National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)] 
 
77. RLV-TD are a series of technology demonstration missions that have been conceived by 
ISRO as a first step towards realizing a Two Stage To Orbit (TSTO) fully re-usable launch 
vehicle. What is full form of RLV-TD? 
[A] Reusable Launch Vehicle-Technology Demonstration 
[B] Remote Launch Vehicle-Technology Demonstration 
[C] Return Launch Vehicle-Technology Demonstration 
[D] Reusable Launch Vehicle-Technology Device 
Answer: A [Reusable Launch Vehicle-Technology Demonstration] 
 
78. On which of the following Inertia of an object depends ? 
[A] Bulk 
[B] Size 
[C] Shape 
[D] Mass 
Answer: D [Mass] 
 
79. A person who is pulling a bucket filled with water falls behind with the sudden break of the 
rope. Which of the following laws of Newton comes into action? 
[A] First Law 
[B] Second law 
[C] Third law 
[D] First and third law 
Answer: C [Third law] 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 55 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
54 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
80. In which of the following situations the force applied by the weight of a person becomes zero 
in a lift 
[A] Lift moves up with an acceleration of 9.8 meter per sq. second 
[B] Lift moves down with an acceleration of 9.8 meter per sq. second 
[C] Lift moves up with an speed of 9.8 meter per second 
[D] Lift moves up with down speed of 9.8 meter per second 
Answer: B [Lift moves down with an acceleration of 9.8 meter per sq. second] 
 
81. On which of the following the jet Engine works? 
[A] Conservation of energy 
[B] Conservation of Linear Momentum 
[C] Conservation of Mass 
[D] Conservation of Angular momentum 
Answer: B [Conservation of Linear Momentum]- Conservation of Linear Momentum law says 
that if no external force acts on a system, then its total linear momentum remains conserved. In 
equation form, Momentum=mass*velocity. To increase the momentum of an object, we need to 
either increase its mass or velocity or both. 
Rockets work on law of conservation of momentum. As momentum in one direction is given to 
the rocket‘s exhaust gases, momentum in the other direction is given to the rocket itself. 
 
82. Which among the following is in action in the process of a liquid rising in the syringe when 
the piston is pulled up? 
[A] Capillary action 
[B] surface tension 
[C] atmospheric pressure 
[D] cohesive forces 
Answer: C [atmospheric pressure] 
 
83. Which among the following character of mercury makes it suitable to use in barometers 
instead of water? 
[A] Low density and low vapor pressure 
[B] High density and high vapor pressure 
[C] Low density and good conductor of heat 
[D] High density and low vapor pressure 
Answer: D [High density and low vapor pressure] 
 
84. When a barometer is taken down in a coal mine , which of the following happens with the 
Mercury level in the tube? 
[A] rises 
[B] falls 
[C] falls then rises 
[D] remains unaltered 
Answer: A [rises]- Notes:The density of the air rises as we go below sea level 
 
85. what happens when a ship enters a Sea from a river ? 
[A] It rises 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 56 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
55 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
[B] It remains at the same level 
[C] sinks a little 
[D] None of the above 
Answer: A [It rises]- When a ship enters a sea from a river ,the ship is elevated or uplifted due 
to the density of sea water and during the buoyant motion of the ship, as it would gain both 
potential and kinetic energy when rising in the fluid. 
 
86. A transition from the solid to gas phase with no intermediate liquid stage is called? 
[A] Evaporation 
[B] Sublimation 
[C] Adsorption 
[D] Solid Phase extraction 
Answer: B [Sublimation] 
 
87. Which among the following works while we wipe with a towel.? 
[A] evaporation 
[B] osmosis 
[C] capillary action 
[D] surface tension 
Answer: C [capillary action] 
 
88. If water is heated , it vapor pressure will ______? 
[A] Increase 
[B] decrease 
[C] first increase and then decrease 
[D] nothing happens to vapor pressure 
Answer: A [Increase] 
 
89. When two mercury drops are brought into contact they form a single bigger drop to get 
which of the following? 
[A] Minimum volume 
[B] Minimum surface area 
[C] Maximum size 
[D] Maximum surface area 
Answer: B [Minimum surface area] 
 
90. On a smooth glass surface , the drop of water spreads while the drop of mercury remains 
almost spherical. This proves that ________? 
[A] Cohesive forces of mercury is more than adhesive forces with glass 
[B] Cohesive force of water is less than cohesive forces of mercury 
[C] mercury is a metal 
[D] 1 & 2 
Answer: A [Cohesive forces of mercury is more than adhesive forces with glass] 
 
91. Which of the following causes the drop of water to be in spherical shape? 
[A] Viscosity 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 57 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
56 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
[B] Air resistance 
[C] Surface tension 
[D] Temperature 
Answer: C [Surface tension] 
 
92. kalpana-1 was first exclusive satellite built by ISRO in which of the following satellite 
systems? 
[A] INSAT 
[B] METSAT 
[C] GSAT 
[D] EDUSAT 
Answer: B [METSAT] 
 
93. First Indian Satellite Aryabhatta was launched in which year ? 
[A] 1970 
[B] 1972 
[C] 1975 
[D] 1980 
Answer: C [1975]- India‘s first satellite Aryabhatta was launched by India on 19 April 1975 from 
Russian space station using Kosmos-3M launch vehicle.  
 
94. What is TERLS? 
[A] A rocket launching Station 
[B] A Space Science & Technology Center 
[C] A satellite launched by India 
[D] A satellite launched by USA 
Answer: A [A rocket launching Station]- TERL-Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station. 
TERLS established in 1962 
 
95. Which among the following is known for a FBTR (fast Breeder Test Reactor) ? 
[A] Naror 
[B] Trombay 
[C] Kalpakam 
[D] None of the above 
Answer: C [Kalpakam] 
 
96. Which among the following is the property of Tungsten which makes it eligible to use in the 
bulbs? 
[A] highest melting point 
[B] highest resistance 
[C] Highest malleability 
[D] All are correct 
Answer: A [highest melting point]- The electric heating is also used to produce light, as in an 
electric bulb. Here, the filament must retain as much of the heat generated as is possible, so 
that it gets very hot and emits light. It must not melt at such high temperature. A strong metal 
with high melting point such as tungsten (melting point 3380°C) is used for making bulb 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 58 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
57 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
filaments. The filament should be thermally isolated as much as possible, using insulating 
support, etc. The bulbs are usually filled with chemically inactive nitrogen and argon gases to 
prolong the life of filament. Most of the power consumed by the filament appears as heat, but a 
small part of it is in the form of light radiated. 
 
97. Who among the following is considered by the Indian scientific community to be the father of 
experimental fluid dynamics research in India and one of the most eminent researchers in the 
field of turbulence and boundary layers? 
[A] Suhas V. Patankar 
[B] Satish Dhawan 
[C] M O Smith 
[D] JC Bose 
Answer: B [Satish Dhawan] 
 
98. The speed of Sound is maximum in which of the following ? 
[A] Air at zero degree C 
[B] Air at 100 degree C 
[C] Water 
[D] At all places it is maximum 
Answer: C [Water]- In a given ideal gas the speed of sound depends only on its temperature. 
The speed of sound in still air at 0 degrees Celsius is 331.5 m / s. It depends on the 
temperature and material. Since sound is transferred easily through densely packed molecules, 
it is faster in denser substances. Thus the speed of sound increases with the stiffness of the 
material. 
 
99. Steam at 100 degree centigrade causes more severe burns. Which of the following 
phenomena will you use to explain this? 
[A] Specific heat 
[B] Latent heat 
[C] Fusion 
[D] Fission 
Answer: B [Latent heat] 
 
100. Which of the following waves can be used to measure the speed of a approaching car? 
[A] Light waves 
[B] Micro waves 
[C] Radio waves 
[D] Sound waves 
Answer: C [Radio waves] 
 
101. Which among the following sentence is correct reason behind the blue color of ocean water? 
[A] Water molecules absorb all other colors except blue 
[B] Impurities in Sea water reflect the blue light 
[C] Water molecules scatter the blue light 
[D] None of the above 
Answer: C [Water molecules scatter the blue light] 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 59 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
58 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
102. The Helium atoms that have lost two electrons are called ________? 
[A] Alpha rays 
[B] Beta rays 
[C] Gamma rays 
[D] None of the above 
Answer: A [Alpha rays] 
 
103. What is the approximate height of a Geostationary satellite ? 
[A] 981 km 
[B] 15000 kms 
[C] 35000 kms 
[D] 5000 kms 
Answer: C [35000 kms] 
 
104. The inability of a body to change its state of rest or its uniform motion in a straight line is 
called as ________? 
[A] Mass 
[B] weight 
[C] Inertia 
[D] Friction 
Answer: C [Inertia] 
 
105. Ohm is a unit of measuring _________? 
[A] Resistance 
[B] Voltage 
[C] Current 
[D] None of the above 
Answer: A [Resistance] 
 
106. Equal volumes of all gases contain equal number of molecules under similar conditions of 
temperature and pressure. Which law says this ? 
[A] Boyle‘s law 
[B] Charles law 
[C] Avogadro‘s Law 
[D] Bhor‘s law 
Answer: C [Avogadro’s Law] 
 
107. Which among the following is a property of Insulator? 
[A] The electrons of the outer orbits are loosely bound to the nucleus , however can not flow 
through them 
[B] The electrons of the outer orbits are tightly bound to the nucleus and can not flow through 
them 
[C] The electrons of the outer orbits are loosely bound to the nucleus , and can flow through 
them 
[D] None of the above 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 60 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
59 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
Answer: B [The electrons of the outer orbits are tightly bound to the nucleus and can not 
flow through them] 
 
108. Which among the following is true about latent heat ? 
[A] It causes change in temperature as well as change in state or phase 
[B] It causes change in temperature only 
[C] It causes change in state or phase but not in temperature 
[D] It causes change in Pressure 
Answer: C [It causes change in state or phase but not in temperature] 
109. When light from some sources enters to the earth‘s atmosphere, it gets scattered. Which 
among the following is a reason behind scattering? 
[A] Various wavelengths of light 
[B] dust, smoke and gas molecules 
[C] atmospheric pressure 
[D] None of the above 
Answer: B [dust, smoke and gas molecules] 
 
110. Which among the following is true about Total Internal Reflection? 
[A] A ray passing from rarer to denser medium and not able to pass to denser medium at an 
angle greater than critical angle 
[B] A ray passing from denser to rarer medium and not able to pass to rarer medium at an angle 
greater than critical angle 
[C] A ray passing from either denser to rarer medium or rarer to denser medium and not able to 
pass any medium at an angle smaller than critical angle 
[D] None of the above 
Answer: B [A ray passing from denser to rarer medium and not able to pass to rarer 
medium at an angle greater than critical angle] 
 
111. Which among the following principle is used by Bats? 
[A] RADAR (Radio Detective & Ranging 
[B] SONAR (Sound Navigation & Ranging 
[C] law of reflection 
[D] law of diffraction 
Answer: B [SONAR (Sound Navigation & Ranging] 
 
112. Which among the following is true regarding Sound Waves? 
[A] They are longitudinal waves and material medium is not required for their propagation 
[B] They are transverse waves and material medium is required for their propagation 
[C] They are longitudinal waves and material medium is required for their propagation 
[D] They are transverse waves and material medium is not required for their propagation 
Answer: C [They are longitudinal waves and material medium is required for their 
propagation] 
 
113. Which among the following is true about conduction, convection and radiation mode of 
transfer of heat? 
[A] A Medium is required for conduction but not required for convection and radiation 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 61 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
60 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
[B] A medium is required for conduction, convection and radiation 
[C] A medium is required for conduction and convection but not required for radiation 
[D] A medium is not required for conduction and convectio, radiation 
Answer: C [A medium is required for conduction and convection but not required for 
radiation] 
 
114. The ideal fluid which is a hypothetical fluid should contain _______? 
[A] Zero Viscosity Only 
[B] Zero Compressibility Only 
[C] Zero Viscosity & Zero Compressibility 
[D] None of the above 
Answer: C [Zero Viscosity & Zero Compressibility] 
 
115. Which among the following defines cohesive force? 
[A] the force of attraction acting between the molecules of same material 
[B] the force of attraction acting between the molecules of different material 
[C] the force of attraction acting between the atoms of same material 
[D] None of the above 
Answer: A [the force of attraction acting between the molecules of same material] 
 
116. Which of the following term denotes the internal reaction force per unit area developed as 
a result of applied external force ? 
[A] Stress 
[B] Friction 
[C] Moment of Inertia 
[D] tension 
Answer: A [Stress] 
 
117. What is the mean value of g at earth‘s surface? 
[A] 0.98 meter per second 
[B] 9.8 meter per second 
[C] 9.8 meter per second square 
[D] 0.98 meter per second square 
Answer: C [9.8 meter per second square] 
 
118. The value of acceleration due to gravity is __________? 
[A] Minimum at equator and maximum at poles 
[B] maximum at equator and minimum at poles 
[C] equal at poles and equator 
[D] None of the above 
Answer: A [Minimum at equator and maximum at poles] 
 
119. Which among the following defines gravitational mass? 
[A] Ratio of weight of a body and acceleration due to gravity 
[B] Ratio of Acceleration due to gravity and weight of a body 
[C] matter contained in a body 
[D] None of the above 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 62 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
61 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
Answer: A [Ratio of weight of a body and acceleration due to gravity] 
 
120. The scientists have discovered that Milky Way is having two components, the disc and 
spherical. What may be the central object of Milky Way? 
[A] A Black Hole 
[B] A Neuron star 
[C] Vaccum 
[D] A Large Magellanic Cloud 
Answer: A [A Black Hole] 
 
121. Which among the following kinds of glass is used generally in making of the Bullet proof 
screens? 
[A] Pyrex glass 
[B] Jena glass 
[C] Reinforced Glass 
[D] Flint Glass 
Answer: C [Reinforced Glass]- Reinforced Glass or Toughened glass or tempered glass is a 
kind of safety glass is used as s a component of bulletproof glass, for diving masks, and various 
types of plates and cookware. 
 
122. Which among the following would be most commonly affected, if the filament of a electric 
Bulb is not uniform? 
[A] Light 
[B] Life 
[C] Resistance 
[D] None of the above 
Answer: B [Life] 
 
123. The term ―Isopycnic‖ is most closely defined by which among the following? 
[A] Two places with same atmospheric pressure 
[B] Two liquids with same viscosity 
[C] Two liquids with same density 
[D] Two places with same temperature 
Answer: C [Two liquids with same density] 
 
124. Calorie of Energy is equal to _________? 
[A] .42 joule 
[B] 4.2 joule 
[C] 42 joule 
[D] 0.042 Joule 
Answer: B [4.2 joule] 
 
125. A pendulum is taken to Moon , its time period will___________? 
[A] Increases 
[B] Decreases 
[C] Remains constant 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 63 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
62 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
[D] Either increase or decrease 
Answer: A [Increases] 
 
126. Knot is a unit of _________? 
[A] Speed 
[B] Distance 
[C] Deapth 
[D] Accelration 
Answer: A [Speed] 
 
127. One Nautical Mile is equivalent to how many meters? 
[A] 1552 
[B] 1652 
[C] 1752 
[D] 1852 
Answer: D [1852] 
 
128. In which year, Government of India launched the Integrated Guided Missile Development 
Program? 
[A] 1981 
[B] 1983 
[C] 1990 
[D] 1999 
Answer: B [1983]- The Integrated Guided Missile Development Program (IGMDP) was 
launched in 1983 to develop five missile systems in the country viz. Trishul, Akash, Nag, Prithvi 
and Agni-I (intermediate-range surface-to-surface missile). In 1990s, the program was 
expanded to develop the long range Agni Missile, Sagarika (ballistic missile), Surya (medium-
range version of the Agni ballistic missile) and Dhanush (naval version of the Prithvi). In 2008, 
the DRDO announced the successful completion of the program. 
 
129. What is the use of Venturimeter? 
[A] to measure subdivisions of scale 
[B] to measure wavelength of radio wave 
[C] To measure friction 
[D] to measure rate of flow of fluids 
Answer: D [to measure rate of flow of fluids] 
 
130. Which among the following is measured using a Vernier Calliper? 
[A] Dimensions 
[B] Time 
[C] Sound 
[D] Temperature 
Answer: A [Dimensions] 
 
131. Which among the following is used to listen and record underwater sounds? 
[A] Altimeter 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 64 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
63 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
[B] SONAR 
[C] Hydrophone 
[D] RADAR 
Answer: C [Hydrophone] 
 
132. Consider the following: 
Help ISRO in Research 
Help Department of Space in New Discoveries 
Commercially sell Products & Services of Indian Space 
Which among the above is / are the correct objectives of ANTRIX? 
[A] 1 & 2 
[B] 2 & 3 
[C] Only 2 
[D] Only 3 
Answer: D [Only 3]- ANTRIX is the commercial arm of Indian Space Research Organisation 
(ISRO). It is an anglicised version of Antariksha, from the Sanskrit word for ―space‖. It functions 
under the aegis of Department of Space (DoS), an independent Department directly working 
under the Prime Minister 
 
133. Any moving object on earth finally comes to rest due to which among the following? 
[A] Gravity 
[B] Friction 
[C] Inertia 
[D] Motion 
Answer: B [Friction] 
 
134. When Ozone is heated its volume will…. ? 
[A] increases 
[B] decreases 
[C] remains unchanged 
[D] First Increase, then decrease 
Answer: C [remains unchanged] 
 
135. Consider the following: 
Pressurized heavy water reactor (PHWR) 
Fast breeder reactor (FBR) 
Advanced Heavy Water Reactor(AHWR) 
The above three represent the stages of India‘s three stage Nuclear Power programme as 
follows respectively? 
[A] Stage I, Stage II, Stage III 
[B] Stage II, Stage I, Stage III 
[C] Stage III, Stage II, Stage I 
[D] Stage II, Stage III, Stage I 
Answer: A [Stage I, Stage II, Stage III]- India‘s three stage nuclear power programme was 
formulated in 1950s by Dr. Homi Bhabha to secure the country‘s long term energy 
independence, via use of uranium and thorium reserves found in the monazite sands of coastal 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 65 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
64 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
regions of South India. The ultimate focus is on Thorium Fuel Cycle. The three stages are as 
follows: 
Pressurized heavy water reactor (PHWR) 
Fast breeder reactor (FBR) 
Advanced Heavy Water Reactor(AHWR) 
  
136. Which among the following is the site of Prototype Fast Breeder Reactor (PFBR) in India? 
[A] Kudankulam 
[B] Kalpakkam 
[C] Narora 
[D] Rawatbhata 
Answer: B [Kalpakkam] 
 
137. Chandrashekhar Limit, postulated by Dr S. Chandrashekhar posts a limit of mass of which 
among the following? 
[A] Neutron Star 
[B] White Dwarf 
[C] Steller Black Hole 
[D] Young stellar object 
Answer: B [White Dwarf]- In 1931, the astrophysicist Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar theorised 
that a star would not form a stable white dwarf at the end of its life if its mass was greater than 
1.44 times the solar mass (1.44 Ms). This is known as the Chandrasekhar limit, above which the 
white dwarf will explode as what is called a ―Type 1a supernova‖. This work fetched 
Chandrasekhar the Nobel Prize in 1983. 
 
138. India‘s first Nobel Prize for Physics was claimed in 1930 by the renowned physicist Sir C.V. 
Raman for his work in which among the following fields? 
[A] Particle Physics 
[B] Optics 
[C] Thermodynamics 
[D] Quantum Mechanics 
Answer: B [Optics]- In 1930, C.V. Raman became the first person from Asia to be awarded a 
Nobel Prize in any field of science. The date of the discovery, February 28, is now celebrated as 
National Science Day in India. 
 
139. What is the name of India‘s first nuclear reactor ? 
[A] Cirius 
[B] Apsara 
[C] Dhruva 
[D] Kamini 
Correct Answer: B [Apsara] 
 
140. Which among the following is NOT taken into account while choosing an orbit of the 
Satellite? 
[A] Earth‘s radius 
[B] Gravitational force of the earth 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 66 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
65 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
[C] Mass of the satellite 
[D] Distance from Earth 
Answer: C [Mass of the satellite] 
 
141. Hydraulic Brakes work on which principal? 
[A] Pascal‘s Principle 
[B] Archimedes Principle 
[C] Newton‘s Laws 
[D] Casini‘s Laws 
Answer: A [Pascal’s Principle]- In 1647 the French scientist Blaise Pascal (1623–1662) 
discovered that water exerts the same pressure in all directions. This statement is known as 
Pascal‘s Principle. Pascal‘s law states that increase in pressure at a point in the enclosed liquid 
in equilibrium is transmitted equally in all directions in liquid and to the Walls of the container. 
The working of hydraulic lift, hydraulic press and hydraulic brakes are based on Pascal‘s law. 
 
142. Zero point energy is the lowest possible energy that a quantum mechanical physical 
system may have. ―Who among the following proposed this concept? 
[A] Max Planck 
[B] Albert Einstein and Otto Stern 
[C] Hendrik B. G. Casimir 
[D] Gribbin, John 
Answer: B [Albert Einstein and Otto Stern] 
 
143. Consider the following: 
Dispersion 
Total Internal Reflection 
Refraction 
[A] 1 
[B] 1,2 
[C] 1,2,3 
[D] 2,3 
Answer: C [1,2,3] 
 
144. Which among the following lens is used to correct Presbyopia? 
[A] Convex 
[B] Concave 
[C] Bifocal 
[D] Cylindracal 
Answer: C [Bifocal]- In Presbyopia defect both near and far object are not clearly visible i.e., 
far point is lesser than infinity and near point greater than 25 cm. This can be removed either by 
using two separate spectacles one for myopia and other for hypermetropia or by using bifocal 
lens. It is an old age disease. At old age ciliary muscles lose their elasticity so they can not 
change the focal length of eye lens effectively and eye losses its power of accommodation 
 
145. Which among the following kinds of lenses are used to treat Astigmatism? 
[A] Convex Lens 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 67 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
66 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
[B] Concave Lens 
[C] Bifocal Lens 
[D] Cylindrical 
Answer: D [Cylindrical]- Astigmatism is due to imperfect spherical nature of eye lens. The 
focal length of eye lens is in two orthogonal directions become different so they cannot see 
objects in two orthogonal directions simultaneously. This defect in direction can be removed by 
using cylindrical lens in a particular direction. 
  
146. Kakrapar Atomic Power Station (KAPS-1) is located in which among the following states? 
[A] Maharastra 
[B] Gujarath 
[C] Goa 
[D] Karnataka 
Answer: B [Gujarath] 
 
147. If in a closed room , the door of a refrigerator is kept open for some time , the temperature 
of room will ? 
[A] Increase 
[B] Decrease 
[C] Remains same 
[D] First decrease then become stable 
Answer: A [Increase] 
 
148. First steam-powered vehicle was built by? 
[A] Richard Trevithick 
[B] Nicolas-Joseph Cugnot 
[C] Don Walsh 
[D] Janice Meek 
Answer: B [Nicolas-Joseph Cugnot] 
 
149. Which among the following is a source of Atomic Energy ? 
[A] Iron 
[B] Uranium 
[C] Silver 
[D] Platinum 
Answer: B [Uranium] 
150. Which among the following types of glasses contains Cerium and other rare earths and 
has a high absorption of ultraviolet rays? 
[A] Crookes Glass 
[B] Pyrex Glass 
[C] Flint Glass 
[D] Crown Glass 
Answer: A [Crookes Glass] 
 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 68 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
67 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
151. CDRI is among the thirty eight laboratories that are functioning under the aegis of the 
council of scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) of India. Where is located CDRI (Central 
Drug Research Institute)? 
[A] Bhopal 
[B] Lucknow 
[C] Kolkata 
[D] Bangalore 
Hide Answer 
Answer: B [Lucknow] 
 
152. Who among the following is the chairman of Council of Scientific and Industrial Research 
(CSIR)? 
[A] Prime Minister of India 
[B] Minister of Science & Technology 
[C] Secretary, Department of Technology 
[D] None of them 
Answer: A [Prime Minister of India]- Prime Minister of India is the chairman of the Council of 
Scientific and Industrial Research. Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) 
established in 1942, is an autonomous body and India‘s largest research and development 
(R&D) organisation, with 37 laboratories and 39 field stations or extension centres spread 
across the nation, with a collective staff of over 17,000. It operates as an autonomous body 
registered under the Registration of Societies Act of 1860 
  
153. Consider the following comparisons between the Resourcesat-1 and Resourceset-2: 
1. The Resourceset-2 will be able to collect data from a wider strip of the Earth‘s surface 
2. The Resourceset -2 will provide remote sensing data services for entire globe, in contrast 
with some selected area by Resourcesat-1 
3. The Resourcesat-2 has been launched with additional payload known as AIS (Automatic 
Identification System) from COMDEV, Canada as an experimental payload for ship surveillance 
in VHF band 
Which among the above statement is / are correct? 
[A] Only 1 is correct 
[B] Only 2 is correct 
[C] 1 & 3 are correct 
[D] 2 & 3 are correct 
Answer: C [1 & 3 are correct]- The Resourcesat was launched recently via the PSLV C-16. 
The first statement which says that Resourceset-2 will be able to collect data from a wider strip 
of the Earth`s surface is correct. The profile page of Resourcesat-2 on ISRO website mentions 
that important changes in RESOURCESAT-2 compared to RESOURCESAT-1 are- 
Enhancement of LISS-4 multispectral swath from 23 km to 70 km and improved radiometric 
accuracy from 7 bits to 10 bits for LISS-3 and LISS-4 and 10 bits to 12 bits for AWIFS. Besides, 
suitable changes, including miniaturization in payload electronics, have been made in 
RESOURCESAT-2. The Swath width means the strip of the Earth`s surface from which data are 
collected by a satellite. 
Statement 2 is NOT correct, because Resourcesat-1 was doing the same job and now 
Resourcesat-2 extends that. 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 69 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
68 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
Statement 3 is correct fact about the latest launch. Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV)-C16 
has on 20.4.2011 successfully launched India`s RESOURCESAT-2 satellite, the joint Indo-
Russian YOUTHSAT satellite, and Singapore`s first satellite X-SAT. Resourcesat-2 is India`s 
18th remote sensing satellite.  
  
154. Which among the following correctly defines Pinaka? 
[A] A Multi Barrel Rocket Launcher Developed by DRDO 
[B] A Missile Developed by DRDO 
[C] A Missile imported from Russia 
[D] A rocket launcher developed by France 
Answer: A [A Multi Barrel Rocket Launcher Developed by DRDO] 
 
155. Which among the following can be measured with Anemometer? 
[A] Water Velocity 
[B] Wind Velocity 
[C] Relative Humidity 
[D] Absolute Humidity 
Answer: B [Wind Velocity] 
 
156. At which among the following temperatures, the indicator of Celsius and Fahrenheit 
thermometers will show the same reading? 
[A] -40°C 
[B] -65°C 
[C] -25°C 
[D] -32°C 
Answer: A [-40°C] 
 
157. At which among the following points, the high tides are lower than usual and low tides are 
higher than usual? 
[A] New Moon 
[B] Full Moon  
[C] Apogee 
[D] Perigee 
Answer: C [Apogee] 
 
158. Phobos and Deimos are the natural satellites of which of the following planets? 
[A] Mars 
[B] Saturn 
[C] Jupiter 
[D] Earth 
Answer: A [Mars]- Mars is known as the red planet because it looks red from Earth. The 
reddish color comes from high concentration of iron oxide compounds that is rust—in the rocks 
of the Martian surface. 
Phobos and Deimos are the natural satellites of Mars. 
 
 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 70 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
69 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
159. Sun accounts for approximately what fraction of total mass of Solar System ? 
[A] 70% 
[B] 90% 
[C] 95% 
[D] 99.86% 
Answer: D [99.86%] 
 
160. In which of the following light produces image focus in front of the retina? 
[A] Presbyopia 
[B] Myopia 
[C] Hyperopia 
[D] Hypertropia 
Answer: B [Myopia]- The inability to see the distant objects clearly and distinctly is called short 
sightedness or Myopia. This defect arises when the image is formed infront of the retina. A short 
sighted person can see near objects clearly. This may arise due to either excessive curvature of 
the cornea or elongation of the eyeball. This defect is corrected by wearing glasses with a 
concave lens. 
The inability to see near objects clearly and distinctly is called long sightedness or 
Hypermetropia. This defect arises when the image is formed behind the retina. This defect may 
arise due to shortening of eye ball. A long sighted person can see the distant objects clearly. 
This defect is corrected by wearing spectacles with convex lens (converging) of appropriate 
focal length. A converging lens will correct this defect by converging the incoming rays so that 
the image is formed on the retina. 
 
161. Which among the following is also known as Dog Star? 
[A] Alpha Centauri 
[B] Proxima centauri 
[C] Sirius 
[D] Aludra 
Answer: C [Sirius] Sirius is the Brightest star in the sky. 
 
162. The name of Robert Watson-Watt is associated with which among the following 
inventions? 
[A] Steam Engine 
[B] Electric Bulb 
[C] Radar technology 
[D] Microwaves 
Answer: C [Radar technology] 
 
163. Which among the following scientists is known for laws of planetary motion? 
[A] Newton 
[B] Kepler 
[C] Galileo 
[D] Faraday 
Answer: B [Kepler]- Kepler proposed Laws of planetary motion. These three laws describes 
the behavior of planets in the heliocentric model; 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 71 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
70 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
The three laws of Kepler can be stated as follows: 
Law of orbits: All planets move in elliptical orbits with the Sun situated at one of the foci of the 
ellipse 
Law of areas: The line that joins any planet to the sun sweeps equal areas in equal intervals of 
time. 
Law of periods: The Square of the time period of revolution of a planet is proportional to the 
cube of the semi-major axis of the ellipse traced out by the planet. The law of areas can be 
understood as a consequence of conservation of angular momentum which is valid for any 
central force 
 
164. The ―Amos‖ series of satellites belongs to which among the following countries? 
[A] India 
[B] USA 
[C] Israel 
[D] China 
Answer: C [Israel] 
 
165. Which among the following compound is most commonly used in the Photochromic 
lenses? 
[A] Potassium Dichromate 
[B] Silver Chloride 
[C] Potassium ferrate 
[D] Ferric Chloride 
Answer: B [Silver Chloride]- Photochromatic or Photochromic glass acquires a darker shade 
when exposed to bright light and returns to its original lighter shade in dim light. This happens 
because silver halides (iodide or chloride)  is added to this glass 
 
166. Which among the following are being procured by India for its armed forces, under the 
Project-75 India (P-75I) Programme? 
[A] Medium multi-role combat aircraft 
[B] Falcon Awacs 
[C] Submarines 
[D] Aircraft Career Ships 
Answer: C [Submarines]- Under Project 75, six Scorpene submarines are being built with 
assistance and technology transfer from DCNS of France under deal signed in October 2005. 
The Project 75I-class submarine is a follow-on of the Project 75 Kalvari-class submarine for the 
Indian navy. 
 
167.  Soviet aircraft carrier Admiral Gorshkov, has been rechristened in India as which among 
the following? 
[A] INS Viraat 
[B] INS Vikramaditya 
[C] INS Chakra 
[D] INS Arihant 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 72 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
71 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
Answer: B [INS Vikramaditya]- INS Vikramaditya is the country‘s sole aircraft carrier (after 
retirement of INS Viraat in March 2017). It was built in 1987 and had served the Soviet navy 
(named as Baku). It was later renamed Admiral Gorshkov under the Russian navy. 
 
168. In context with the Defense of India, Advanced Technology Vessel (ATV) Projects are 
related to which among the following? 
[A] Nuclear Capable Missiles 
[B] Nuclear Capable Submarines 
[C] Aircraft Career Ships 
[D] Amphibious warfare vessels 
Answer: B [Nuclear Capable Submarines] 
 
169. Which among the following radiations in the Sunlight causes tanning and sunburn? 
[A] Ultraviolet 
[B] Visible 
[C] Infrared 
[D] Micro waves 
Answer: A [Ultraviolet] 
 
170. What is the focal length of a concave lense with number -5D? 
[A] 5 cm 
[B] 10 cm 
[C] 15 cm 
[D] 20 cm 
Answer: D [20 cm] 
 
171. What is the focal length of a concave lense with number -5D? 
[A] 5 cm 
[B] 10 cm 
[C] 15 cm 
[D] 20 cm 
Answer: D [20 cm] 
 
172. The asteroid belt is a region of the Solar System located roughly between the orbits of 
which among the following planets? 
[A] Earth & Mars 
[B] Mars & Jupiter 
[C] Jupiter and Saturn 
[D] Saturn and Pluto 
Answer: B [Mars & Jupiter]- There is a large gap in between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter. 
This gap is occupied by a large number of small objects that revolve around the Sun. These are 
called asteroids. 
 
173. India‘s First Moon Mission Chandrayaan was launched on which among the following 
dates? 
[A] October 27, 2007 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 73 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
72 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
[B] October 22, 2008 
[C] November 23, 2008 
[D] December 17, 2008 
Answer: B [October 22, 2008]- Chandrayaan was launched on October 22nd 2008 and 
successfully reached the lunar surface on November 14, 2008. The ISRO lost communication 
with Chandrayaan-1 on August 29, 2009, almost a year after it was launched on October 22, 
2008. It operated for 312 days. 
In 2017 NASA‘s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) have found India‘s first lunar probe, 
Chandrayaan-1 which was considered lost, is still orbiting the moon. 
 
174. Which of the following is India‘s first nuclear reactor: 
[A] Apsara 
[B] Dhruva 
[C] Rawatbhatta 
[D] Kudankulam 
Answer: A [Apsara]- Apsara is the first nuclear research reactor not only in India but also in 
the whole of Asia 
 
175. In which of the following states is located the Indian Astronomical Observatory? 
[A] Karnataka  
[B] Uttar Pradesh 
[C] Maharashtra  
[D] Jammu & Kashmir 
Answer: D [Jammu & Kashmir]- Indian Astronomical Observatory is located in Leh in Ladakh 
(Jammu & Kashmir). It is operated by Indian Institute of Astro-physics (Bangalore). 
 
176. Which among the following is the largest nuclear power station of India by capacity? 
[A] Tarapur Atomic Power Station, Maharashtra 
[B] Rajasthan Atomic Power Station, Rawatbhata 
[C] Kaiga Atomic Power Station, Karnataka 
[D] Madras Atomic Power Station, Kalpakkam, Tamil Nadu 
Answer: A [Tarapur Atomic Power Station, Maharashtra]- With a capacity of 1400 MW, 
today, Tarapur is the largest nuclear power station in India. 
 
177. Which among the following the correct English Official name of CERN ( Conseil Européen 
pour la Recherche Nucléaire)? 
[A] European Organization for Nuclear Research 
[B] European Council for Nuclear Research 
[C] European Center for Nuclear Research 
[D] European Nuclear Research organization 
Answer: A [European Organization for Nuclear Research] 
 
178. What is the name of Indian‘s first satellite launch vehicle? 
[A] SLV-1 
[B] SLV-2 
[C] SLV-3 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 74 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
73 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
[D] PSLV-1 
Answer: C [SLV-3]- India‘s first satellite launch vehicle: SLV-3 
The first attempt to launch SLV-3 was in 1979 carrying 35 Kg Rohini satellite but it was failed.  
However, in the second flight of SLV3 during 1980, the Rohini satellite was placed in the orbit. 
 
179. In which year India‘s first satellite Aryabhatta was launched? 
[A] 1975 
[B] 1970 
[C] 1978 
[D] 1965 
Answer: A [1975]- India‘s first satellite Aryabhatta was launched by India on 19 April 1975 from 
Russian space station using Kosmos-3M launch vehicle.  
 
180. Which of the following is responsible for the fact that Tennis ball bounces higher at high 
altitudes than in plains? 
[A] Low Gravity  
[B] High Gravity  
[C] Less dense air  
[D] Low atmospheric temperature 
 Answer: C [ Less dense air ]- The rarified air at high altitudes gives less resistance to ball. 
 
181. Thin lamination is used in a transformer to reduce: 
[A] Eddy current losses 
[B] Hysteresis losses 
[C] Corona losses 
[D] None of the above 
Answer: A [Eddy current losses]- Lamination in a transformer construction reduces eddy 
current losses. Lamination provides with the efficient transfer of energy from the primary coil to 
the secondary one.  
 
182. Which of the following statements is incorrect about a Plane Mirror? 
[A] The focal length of a plane mirror is infinity 
[B] Its optical power is one 
[C] It forms a virtual image of a real object  
[D] It is used in constructing periscope 
Answer: B [Its optical power is one]- Second statement is incorrect because the optical 
power of plane mirror is zero.  
 
183. A high-refractive-index polymer (HRIP) is a polymer that has a refractive index greater than _? 
[A] .50 
[B] 1.0 
[C] 1.20 
[D] 1.50 
Answer: D [1.50]- A high-refractive-index polymer is a polymer that has a refractive index 
greater than 1.50. Such materials are required for anti-reflective coating and photonic devices 
such as light emitting diodes (LEDs) and image sensors. 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 75 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
74 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
184. Consider the following statements regarding Black Holes:  
1. A black hole is a supergiant star that has collapsed into itself  
2. The Black-hole singularity has zero radius  
Which of the above is / are correct statements? 
[A] Only 1  
[B] Only 2  
[C] Both 1 & 2  
[D] Neither 1 nor 2 
Answer: C [ Both 1 & 2 ]- Black hole refers to the remains of a supergiant star that has 
collapsed into itself. It is so dense, and has a gravitational field so intense, that light itself cannot 
escape from it.. Black-hole singularity refers to the object of zero radius into which the matter of 
a black hole is compressed. 
 
185. Which of the following is / are correct statements with respect to Copper (Cu), Silver (Ag) 
and Gold (Au)?  
1. All of them are can be found naturally in their elemental state  
2. All of them belong to same group in the periodic table  
Select the correct option from the codes given below: 
[A] Only 1  
[B] Only 2  
[C] Both 1 & 2  
[D] Neither 1 nor 2 
Answer: C [ Both 1 & 2 ]- The elements Copper (atomic number 29), silver (atomic number 
47), and gold (atomic number 79), are three of the few metals that can be found naturally in 
their elemental state. These three metals have found great use as coins and jewellery for a 
number of reasons, including their resistance to corrosion and their remarkable colors. They are 
all in the same group in the periodic table (group 11), which suggests they should have 
similar—though not identical—properties. 
 
186. A 10 Kg block of Iron has which of the following twice in value in comparison to a 5 Kg 
block of Iron?  
1. Inertia  
2. Mass  
3. Volume  
Select the correct option from the codes given below: 
[A] Only 1 & 2  
[B] Only 2  
[C] Only 1 & 3  
[D] 1, 2 & 3 
Answer: D [ 1, 2 & 3 ]- The answer is yes to all options. A 10 kg block of iron has twice as 
many iron atoms and therefore twice the inertia, mass, and weight. The blocks consist of the 
same material, so the 10 kg block also has twice the volume of 5Kg block. 
 
187. Albert Einstein was awarded Nobel Prize for his path-breaking research and formulation of 
the: 
[A] Theory of Relavitity 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 76 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
75 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
[B] Laws of Photo-Electric Effect 
[C] Principle of Wave-Particle Duality 
[D] Theory of Critical Opalescence 
Answer: B [Laws of Photo-Electric Effect] 
 
188. Which one of the following types of Laser is used in Laser Printers? 
[A] Semiconductor laser 
[B] Excimer Laser 
[C] Dye Laser 
[D] Gas Laser 
Answer: A [Semiconductor laser] 
 
189. The power of a lens is measured in : 
[A] diopters 
[B] aeon 
[C] lumen 
[D] candela 
Answer: A [diopters] 
 
190. The television technology in which a new form of light-emitting crystals which can be 
printed onto flexible plastic sheets to produce a paper-thin display that can be rolled up and 
carried in a pocket is: 
[A] QD-TV 
[B] SED-TV 
[C] Pixel Plus 
[D] Slingbox 
Answer: A [QD-TV] 
 
191. When Lunar Eclipse occur? 
A. When Sun is between Earth and Moon 
B. When Earth is between Sun and Moon 
C. When Moon is between Earth and Sun 
D. When Earth is between Sun and other celestial bodies 
Answer: B. When Earth is between Sun and Moon-  A lunar eclipse occurs when Earth 
crosses between the moon and the sun, which casts a shadow of Earth onto the moon. 
 
192. When did Lunar Eclipse happen? 
A. Half Moon 
B. Full Moon 
C. Equinox 
D. None of the above 
Answer: B. Full Moon- Eclipses of the Moon happen at Full Moon, when the Sun, Earth and 
Moon are aligned to form an exact or an almost straight line. 
 
193. Select the correct option matching together about Earth shadows: 
1. Umbra – darker, central part 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 77 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
76 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
2. Penumbra – the outer part 
3. Antumbra – partly shaded area beyond the umbra 
Correct Options are: 
A. Only 1 and 2 
B. Only 2 and 3 
C. Only 1 
D. All 1, 2 and 3 
Answer: D. All 1, 2 and 3- Shadow of earth is divided into three parts: 
Umbra is the innermost and darkest part of the shadow and an observer experiences total 
eclipse. Penumbra is the region in which only a portion of the light source is blocked by the 
body. Therefore, an observer experiences partial eclipse. Antumbra is the lighter area of a 
shadow that appears beyond umbra. An observer experiences annular eclipse. 
 
194. What is Solar Eclipse? 
A. When moon comes in between Earth and Sun 
B. When Earth comes in between Moon and Sun 
C. When Sun comes in between Earth and Moon 
D. When Sun rays does not reach Earth. 
Answer: A. When moon comes in between Earth and Sun- When the moon orbits Earth, it 
moves between the sun and Earth. When this happens, the moon blocks the light of the sun 
from reaching Earth. During a solar eclipse, the moon casts a shadow onto Earth. 
 
195. When the same pattern of solar eclipse repeats every 18 years 11 days 8 hours are 
known as: 
A. Nodes cycle 
B. Saros cycle 
C. Saras cycle 
D. Payan cycle 
Answer: B. Saros cycle- After one saros cycle of 18 years 11days 8 hours, the pattern of 
eclipses repeats. 
 
196. What do you mean by Blood Moon? 
A. It is total solar eclipse. 
B. It is partial lunar eclipse with red glow 
C. It is total lunar eclipse with deep red glow 
D. None of the above 
Answer: C. It is total lunar eclipse with deep red glow- A Total Lunar Eclipse can get a 
deep red glow and is sometimes called a Blood Moon. 
 
197. During lunar eclipse, the visible red colour is because of: 
A. Dust in space 
B. Dust in moon‘s atmosphere 
C. Dust in earth‘s atmosphere 
D. None of the above 
Answer: C. Dust in earth’s atmosphere- Due to dust in earth‘s atmosphere during lunar 
eclipse red colour is seen. 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 78 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
77 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
198. During a calendar year, the maximum numbers of lunar eclipse that can occur are: 
A. 2 
B. 3 
C. 4 
D. 5 
Answer: B. 3-  
The maximum numbers of lunar eclipse that can occur during a calendar year are 3. 
 
199. What do you understand by an eclipse? 
A. Partial or total blocking of light of one celestial object by another. 
B. Partial or total blocking of light by Moon. 
C. Partial or total blocking of light by Earth. 
D. Partial or total blocking of light by Sun. 
 
Answer: A. Partial or total blocking of light of one celestial object by another.- An eclipse 
takes place when one heavenly body such as a moon or planet moves into the shadow of 
another heavenly body. 
 
200. Diamond ring occurs in which type of solar eclipse? 
A. Total Solar eclipse 
B. Partial Solar eclipse 
C. Annular Solar eclipse 
D. None of the above 
Answer: A. Total Solar eclipse- During total Solar eclipse diamond ring occurs. From this 
quiz we come to know about the lunar and solar eclipse, how eclipse occurs, what is an eclipse 
etc. 
 
GENERAL SCIENCE – CHEMISTRY 
 
1. Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) is a drug used as a : 
[A] Steroid 
[B] Sedative 
[C] Analgesic 
[D] Hallucinogen 
Answer: D [Hallucinogen] 
 
2. Which of the following substances undergo ‗sublimation‘ on heating 
1.Iodine 
2.Napthalene 
3.Camphor 
[A] 1 and 2 
[B] 1 and 3 
[C] 2 and 3 
[D] All of them 
 
 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 79 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
78 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
3. Amalgam‘ is a term used for an alloy of a metal with: 
[A] Copper  
[B] Mercury 
[C] Lead  
[D] Aluminium 
Answer: B [Mercury] 
 
4. Gammaxene, D.D.T. and Bleaching powder are important compounds of : 
[A] Chlorine 
[B] Nitrogen 
[C] Sulphur 
[D] Phosphorus 
Answer: A [Chlorine] 
 
5. L.P.G. is a hydrocarbon consisting of a mixture of: 
[A] Methane and Butane 
[B] Propane and Butane 
[C] Ethane and Propane 
[D] Ethane and Butane 
Answer: B [Propane and Butane] 
 
6. What is Kerogen oil? 
[A] Its an unconventional oil produced from the pyrolysis, hydrogenation, or thermal dissolution 
of Oil Shales 
[B] Its a light crude oil contained in petroleum-bearing formations of shales 
[C] Its an unconventional oil produced from the pyrolysis, hydrogenation, or thermal dissolution 
of environmental wastes 
[D] It‘s a new form of vegetable oil prepared artificially in laboratory 
Answer: A [Its an unconventional oil produced from the pyrolysis, hydrogenation, or 
thermal dissolution of Oil Shales] 
 
7. Which among the following was first human-made plastic? 
[A] Bakelite 
[B] Polyethene 
[C] Celluloid 
[D] Nylon 
Answer: C [Celluloid]- he first human-made plastic was made by Alexander Parkes in 1855, 
when he synthesized celluloid. The new discovery found its use in photographic films, but it 
could not be used for making containers or insulators for electric circuits. 
The first true plastic was made in 1909 by Leo Baekeland, who synthesized Bakelite. The hard 
plastic could be used to make handles, auto parts, etc. The First World War witnessed 
improvements in the manufacture of polystyrene and polyvinyl chloride, which found use in 
plumbing equipment and electric wire insulation. Nylon was synthesized in the 1930s. By 1950, 
plastics became quite popular and as a result we can see them everywhere today 
 
 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 80 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
79 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
8. Which among the following is the correct impact of the London Forces in the Cycloalkanes? 
[A] The melting and boiling points get increased 
[B] The Melting and boiling points get decreased 
[C] There is not impact on the melting and boiling points 
[D] The melting point increases but boiling point decreases 
Answer: A [The melting and boiling points get increased]- Please note that the 
Cycloalkanes with more than 20 carbon atoms are called Cycloparaffins. The cycloalkanes have 
the same properties as the alkanes but they have `Higher Boiling & Melting points`. This is 
because of the stronger dispersion forces between the atoms known as London Forces. 
9. Gargling with a solution of table salt is known to provide relief for a sore throat because ___ ? 
[A] It kills bacteria 
[B] It works as analgesic 
[C] It dehydrates water from inflammatory tissues by Osmosis 
[D] Placebo effect 
Answer: C [It dehydrates water from inflammatory tissues by Osmosis] 
 
10. The Potassium graphite and Calcium Graphite can be mostly used as which among the 
following? 
[A] Moderators 
[B] Semiconductors 
[C] Superconductors 
[D] Lubricants 
Answer: C [Superconductors] 
 
11. Which among the following minerals is also known as Horn Silver? 
[A] Silver Iodide 
[B] Silver Chroride 
[C] Zinc Phosphate 
[D] Silver Sulphide 
Answer: B [Silver Chroride] 
 
12. Consider the following particles in relation to the matter: 
 π-Meson (Pi-meson) 
Photon 
Which among the above are considered to be mass less and charge less? 
[A] Only 1 
[B] Only 2 
[C] Both 1 & 2 
[D] Neither 1 nor 2 
Answer: B [Only 2] 
 
13. Polymetallic Modules (PMN) predominantly contain_____? 
[A] Calcium 
[B] Magnesium 
[C] Manganese 
[D] Copper 
Answer: C [Manganese] 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 81 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
80 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
14. The colors in the fine cut diamond are because of which among the following? 
[A] Variance in transparency of diamond 
[B] Variance in index of refraction 
[C] Presence of Impurities 
[D] Existence of definite planer layers 
Answer: C [Presence of Impurities]- Pure diamond should transmit visible light and appear as 
a clear colorless crystal. Colors in diamond originate from lattice defects and impurities. The 
diamond crystal lattice is exceptionally strong and only atoms of nitrogen, boron and hydrogen 
can be introduced into diamond during the growth at significant concentrations (up to atomic 
percents). Nitrogen gives yellowish color while the Boron gives bluish color. 
 
15. Benzoepin, Parrysulfan, Phaser, Thiodan, Thionex etc. are the names of which among the 
following pesticides? 
[A] Kepone 
[B] Paraquat 
[C] Endosulfan 
[D] Toxaphene 
Answer: C [Endosulfan] 
 
16. An aqueous solution of Sodium Acetate will be of which among the following nature? 
[A] Acidic 
[B] Basic 
[C] Neutral 
[D] Either acidic or basic depending upon temperature of solution 
Answer: B [Basic] 
 
17. Aluminum is getting popular worldwide today as a ―Green Metal‖. Which among the 
following properties of Aluminum makes it a Green Metal? 
[A] Aluminum has been providing a replacement of wood for saving forests and contributes in 
environment protection 
[B] Aluminum is a light metal and it is resistant to corrosion 
[C] Aluminum has fairly high rate of recycling and it can be re-used repeatedly without its quality 
deteriorating 
[D] The lands after the Bauxite mining can be restored very quickly and easily 
Answer: C [Aluminum has fairly high rate of recycling and it can be re-used repeatedly 
without its quality deteriorating] 
 
18. Acetylene cannot be safely pressurized as a pure compound. Which among the following is 
used for safe storage and transportation of Acetylene? 
[A] Kerosene 
[B] Acetone 
[C] Vinegar (Acetic Acid) 
[D] Propylene glycol 
Answer: B [Acetone] 
 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 82 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
81 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
19. Above 70 °C, sodium bicarbonate has a property of gradually decomposing, which makes it 
usable in Bakery products. Which among the following end product of this Thermal 
decomposition of Sodium bicarbonate makes it usable for the above purpose? 
[A] Hydrogen 
[B] Carbon Dioxide 
[C] Water Vapor 
[D] Sodium Carbonate 
Answer: B [Carbon Dioxide]- Above 70 °C, sodium bicarbonate gradually decomposes into 
sodium carbonate, water and carbon dioxide as follows – 
2 NaHCO3 → Na2CO3 + H2O + CO2 , 
In bakery, it reacts with other components or decomposes at higher temperature to release 
carbon dioxide, which causes dough to rise. 
 
20. Which among the following substances is being used most commonly for producing 
synthetic jet Fuel? 
[A] Coal 
[B] Natural Gas 
[C] Plastic Waste 
[D] Biomass 
Answer: A [Coal] 
 
21. A baby diaper, if tested with various solutions, will absorb maximum amount of which 
among the following: 
[A] Distill Water 
[B] Drinking water 
[C] Hard water 
[D] Urine 
Answer: A [Distill Water] 
 
22. Now a days, a little pack of Silica Gel (granular beads of Silica made from Sodium Silicate) 
comes with many products to control humidity and avoid spoilage or degradation of some 
goods. Which among the following property of Silica gel makes it useful for that purpose? 
[A] Silica gel molecules are hydrophilic with large surface area and so its molecules trap the 
moisture 
[B] Silica gel is a Hygroscopic substance with large surface area so its molecules absorb the 
moisture. 
[C] Silica gel molecules are with a portion that is charge-polarized and capable of hydrogen 
bonding, thus bonds with the water molecules 
[D] The semi permeable pouch in which silica gel is placed absorbs the moisture which later 
reacts with water. 
Answer: B [Silica gel is a Hygroscopic substance with large surface area so its 
molecules absorb the moisture.] 
 
23. Which among the following is the correct almost equivalent to 1 MMBTU Natural Gas ? 
[A] 1.054615 gigajoule 
[B] 0.1054615 gigajoul 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 83 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
82 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
[C] 10.54615 gigajoule 
[D] 105.4615 gigajoule 
Answer: A [1.054615 gigajoule] 
 
24. Consider the following statements:  
1. The space between the valence and conduction bands is zero in Graphene 
2. This property of Graphene makes it an excellent transistor of commercial viability 
Which among the above statements is/ are correct? 
[A] Only 1 
[B] Only 2 
[C] Both 1 & 2 
[D] Neither 1 nor 2 
Answer: A [Only 1] 
 
25. Pyrolusite, Braunite, Psilomelane and Rhodochrosite are the ores of which among the 
following:  
1. Manganese  
2. Aluminium  
3. Copper  
Choose the correct option: 
[A] Only 1 
[B] Only 1 & 2 
[C] Only 3 
[D] Only 1 & 3 
Answer: A [Only 1] 
 
26. Consider the following statements:  
1. Copernicium is at present highest-numbered element recognized by IUPAC 
2. Copernicum has been synthesized in the lab by a nuclear reaction of Zinc and Lead Isotopes  
Which among the above statements is / are correct? 
[A] Only 1 is correct 
[B] Only 2 is correct 
[C] Both 1 & 2 are correct 
[D] Neither 1 nor 2 are correct 
Answer: C [Both 1 & 2 are correct] 
 
27. The first metal to be used by man was: 
[A] Aluminum 
[B] copper  
[C] Iron 
[D] Silver 
Answer: B [copper] 
 
28. For respiration in deep sea, divers use mixture of: 
[A] Oxygen and helium  
[B] Oxygen and hydrogen  
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 84 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
83 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
[C] Oxygen and carbon dioxide  
[D] Oxygen, Helium & nitrogen 
Answer: D [Oxygen, Helium & nitrogen] 
 
29. The minimum temperature at which a combustible substance catches fire is called: 
[A] fireless temperature  
[B] ignition temperature  
[C] static temperature  
[D] optimum temperature 
Answer: B [ignition temperature ] 
 
30. Consider the following statements regarding Graphene and Fullerene:  
1. Graphene is 2 dimensional , Fullerene is generally 3 dimensional 
2. Graphene is SP2 allotrope of Carbon, while Fullerene is SP3 allotrope of Carbon 
3. Graphene does not dissolve in petrol but fullerenes dissolve 
Which among the above statements is / are correct? 
[A] Only 1 is correct 
[B] Only 2 is correct 
[C] Only 3 is correct 
[D] 1 & 3 are correct 
Answer: D [1 & 3 are correct] 
 
31. Haber Process is used to produce which among the following? 
 [A] Potash 
[B] Ammonia 
[C] Urea 
[D] Nitrates 
Answer: B [Ammonia] 
 
32. If a Hydrogen atom is removed from a hydrocarbon of Benzene group, the remaining 
residue is called _________? 
[A] Alkyl 
[B] Aryl 
[C] Arene 
[D] Azene 
Answer: B [Aryl] 
 
33. Which among the following kinds of Chemical reactions cause the rocks turn red or 
yellowish? 
[A] Hydration 
[B] Oxidation 
[C] Carbonation 
[D] Exfoliation 
Answer: B [Oxidation] 
 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 85 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
84 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
34. Which among the following is the unit of the scale used for measurement of the spicy heat 
of a chili pepper? 
[A] Smith 
[B] Wright 
[C] Orville 
[D] Scoville 
Answer: D [Scoville] 
 
35. Every kilogram of seawater has approximately how much dissolved salts? 
[A] 1 gm 
[B] 0.35 gms 
[C] 3.5 gms 
[D] 35 gms 
Answer: D [35 gms] 
 
36. Gypsum is added to Cement so that, _________? 
[A] setting of cement can be fastened 
[B] setting of cement can be slowed 
[C] Cement strength can be improved 
[D] Cement strength can be controlled 
Answer: B [setting of cement can be slowed] 
 
37. The color ―Carmine‖ is a shade of which among the following colors? 
[A] Red 
[B] Blue 
[C] Yellow 
[D] Green 
Answer: A [Red] 
 
38. Consider the following:  
Copper  
Zinc 
Tin 
Gun Metal is the alloy of which among the above? 
[A] 1 & 2 
[B] 1 & 3 
[C] 2 & 3 
[D] 1, 2 & 3 
Answer: D [1, 2 & 3] 
 
39. Which among the following makes Chile saltpetre different from saltpetre? 
[A] Nitrate 
[B] Sodium 
[C] Magnesium 
[D] Calcium 
Answer: B [Sodium] 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 86 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
85 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
40. Which among the following is ―Fool‘s Gold‖ ? 
[A] Copper Sulphate 
[B] Iron Sulfide 
[C] Brass 
[D] Silver Bromide 
Answer: B [Iron Sulfide]rrect Answer: D [1 & 3 are correct] 
 
41. When a piece of quicklime is dipped in water, it gives bubbles. This bubbling is due to 
which of the following? 
[A] Oxygen 
[B] Carbon Dioxide 
[C] Water Vapour 
[D] Hydrogen 
Answer: C [Water Vapour] 
 
42. Which among the following acid is used to ascertain, whether pure Ghee has been 
adulterated with Vanaspati or Margarine? 
[A] Sulphuric Acid 
[B] Nitric Acid 
[C] Hydrochloric Acid 
[D] Boric Acid 
Answer: C [Hydrochloric Acid] 
 
43. Mizoroki-Heck reaction is catalyzed by which of the following metals? 
[A] Rhodium 
[B] Sodium 
[C] Palladium 
[D] Osmium 
Answer: C [Palladium] 
 
44. Which among the following is used in preparing windows for X-Ray Tubes ? 
[A] Barium 
[B] Beryllium 
[C] Magnesium 
[D] Calcium 
Answer: B [Beryllium] 
 
45. Which among the following first increases than decreases in a Period of a periodic table? 
[A] metallic property 
[B] Chemical Reactiveness 
[C] Valency 
[D] Electron affinity 
Answer: C [Valency] 
 
46. Which among the following were not discovered by the time , Mendeleev published his 
periodic table? 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 87 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
86 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
[A] Lathanides 
[B] Actinides 
[C] Noble Gases 
[D] Halogens 
Answer: C [Noble Gases] 
 
47. Ekaboron was an element predicted by Mendeleev and he leaved a space for it in his 
Periodic Table. Later Ekaboron was identified with _____? 
[A] Gallium 
[B] Scandium 
[C] Technitium 
[D] Germanium 
Answer: B [Scandium] 
 
48. Which among the following allotropes of Oxygen is found in 6 phases under various 
pressures and temperatures? 
[A] Ozone 
[B] Tetra oxygen 
[C] Octaoxygen 
[D] None of them 
Answer: C [Octaoxygen] 
 
49. Buckeyballs are basically the allotropes of _________? 
[A] Carbon 
[B] Sulfur 
[C] Phosphorus 
[D] Calcium 
Answer: A [Carbon] 
 
50. What is the number of synthetic elements in periodic Table? 
[A] 18 
[B] 22 
[C] 24 
[D] 26 
Answer: C [24] 
 
51. Kimberley Process‖ is related to which among the following ? 
[A] Gold 
[B] Diamonds 
[C] Semi Precious Stones 
[D] Aluminium 
Answer: B [Diamonds] 
 
52. Which among the following protein is responsible for maintenance of osmotic pressure? 
[A] Beta macroglobulin 
[B] Gamma globulin 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 88 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
87 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
[C] immunoglobulin 
[D] albumin 
Answer: D [albumin] 
 
53. Pearl is mainly made up of which among the following? 
[A] Protein 
[B] Calcium Carbonate 
[C] Silica 
[D] Sodium Carbonate 
Answer: B [Calcium Carbonate] 
 
54. As we all know that, Gunpowder is a mixture of sulfur, charcoal, and potassium nitrate. 
Which among these components adds in speeding up the burning of the Gun Powder? 
[A] Only Potassium Nitrate 
[B] Only Charcoal 
[C] Only Sulphur 
[D] Both Sulphur and Potassium Nitrate 
Answer: C [Only Sulphur] 
 
55. Normal‖ rainfall is slightly acidic (and a pH of 5.6 has been assigned which might be 
somewhere near 5 ) because of the presence of _______? 
[A] Nitric Oxide 
[B] Sulphuric Acid 
[C] Nitric Acid 
[D] Carbonic Acid 
Answer: D [Carbonic Acid] 
 
56. Which among the following is not correctly matched? 
[A] Brass: copper and zinc 
[B] Duralumin : Copper and aluminum 
[C] Constantan: Copper and Nickel 
[D] White Gold- Gold and Silver 
Answer: D [White Gold- Gold and Silver]- White Gold has no silver at all. It has nickel, 
manganese or palladium usually 
 
57. Bring out the incorrect usage 
[A] Heavy water – Moderator 
[B] DDT – Insecticide 
[C] Methyl Alcohol – Beverage 
[D] Liquid Ammonia – Refrigerant 
Answer: C [Methyl Alcohol – Beverage]- Methyl Alcohol or methanol is frequently used as a 
denaturant additive for ethanol manufactured for industrial uses. 
 
58. What is Carbamide? 
[A] A Pesticide 
[B] A Fertilizer 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 89 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
88 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
[C] A Textile Dye 
[D] An Explosive 
Answer: B [A Fertilizer]- Carbamide is another name of Urea, an organic compound with 
chemical formula CO(NH2)2. This name indicates that Urea is an amide in which two –NH2 
groups are joined by a carbonyl (C=O) functional group. 
 
59. Which among the following is the main constituent of vegetable oil and animal fats? 
[A] Glycogen 
[B] Triglyceride 
[C] Galactose 
[D] Diglyceride 
Answer: B [Triglyceride] 
 
60. What is the number of known crystalline phases of water? 
[A] 2 
[B] 4 
[C] 10 
[D] 15 
 
61. Which among the following can be used as a preservative in Tomato Juice? 
[A] Sodium Chloride 
[B] Sodium carbonate 
[C] Sodium benzoate 
[D] Sodium Lauril Sulphate 
Answer: C [Sodium benzoate] 
 
62. Which among the following gas has lowest auto-ignition temperature? 
[A] Methane 
[B] Hydrogen 
[C] Ethylene 
[D] Carbon Di Sulphide 
Answer: D [Carbon Di Sulphide]- The auto-ignition temperature of a liquid, gas or vapor is 
the temperature at which the substance will ignite without any external heat source. Here is the 
temperature of some gases:  
Methane -580 °C  
Hydrogen -560 °C  
Propane -493 °C  
Ethylene -425 °C  
Acetylene -305 °C  
Naphtha -290 °C  
Carbon disulfide -102 °C 
 
63. Which among the following is the most stable form of carbon under standard conditions? 
[A] Charcoal 
[B] Graphite 
[C] Diamond 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 90 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
89 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
[D] Amorphous carbon 
Answer: B [Graphite] 
 
64. Which among the following statement is correct? 
[A] Both Melting point & Boiling Point of Heavy water are higher than normal water 
[B] Both Melting point & Boiling Point of Heavy water are lower than normal water 
[C] Melting point is higher and Boiling Point is lower than normal water 
[D] Melting point is lower and Boiling Point is higher than normal water 
Answer: A [Both Melting point & Boiling Point of Heavy water are higher than normal 
water] 
 
65. Which among the following gives hissing sound when dissolved into H2O? 
[A] CaCO2 
[B] Ca(OH)2 
[C] CaO 
[D] CaCl2 
Answer: C [CaO] 
 
66. What is the number of naturally occurring Halogens in the periodic table? 
[A] 3 
[B] 4 
[C] 5 
[D] 6 
Answer: C [5]- fluorine (F), chlorine (Cl), bromine (Br), iodine (I), and astatine (At) 
 
67. Which among the following is the lowest atomic number element without any stable 
isotopes? 
[A] Technetium 
[B] Molybdenum 
[C] Ruthenium 
[D] Niobium 
Answer: A [Technetium] 
 
68. Which among the following is the main constituent of malleable metal alloy Pewter ? 
[A] Copper 
[B] Zinc 
[C] Tin 
[D] Bismuth 
Answer: C [Tin] 
 
69. How many parts are of other metals in a 17 carat Gold? 
[A] 3 
[B] 5 
[C] 7 
[D] 9 
Answer: C [7] 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 91 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
90 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
70. Which among the following does not come under carbon Group of Periodic Table? 
[A] silicon 
[B] germanium 
[C] tin 
[D] selenium 
Answer: D [selenium]- selenium is a chalcogenorrect Answer: D [15] 
 
71. Which among the following is not correctly matched? 
[A] Sodium: Natrium 
[B] Pottassium : Kalium 
[C] Mercury :Hydrargyrum 
[D] Arsenic : Stibium 
Answer: D [Arsenic : Stibium]- Stibium is Antimony 
 
72. The chemical oxygen demand COD test is commonly used to measure which of the 
following? 
[A] amount of organic compounds in water 
[B] amount of oxygen in water 
[C] amount of oxygen in a chemical 
[D] amount of oxygen used in a oxygenation process 
Answer: A [amount of organic compounds in water]- chemical oxygen demand is a 
measure of water quality and is amount of organic pollutants found in surface water. Potassium 
permanganate has been used for many years to measure COD 
 
73. Which among the following is an organic mineral? 
[A] Amber 
[B] Hornblende 
[C] Angite 
[D] Analcime 
Answer: A [Amber] 
 
74. Liming is the application of calcium and magnesium rich materials to soil in various forms, 
including marl, chalk, limestone, or hydrated lime. What is the purpose of liming? 
[A] Increase the Soil pH 
[B] Increase the bacteria activity 
[C] Both A & B 
[D] Decrease the bacterial activity 
Answer: C [Both A & B] 
 
75. Who among the following established that genetic code of all organisms is spelled out in 
three-letter words, each set of three nucleotides codes for a specific amino acid? 
[A] Hargobind Khorana 
[B] Barbara McClintock 
[C] Theodor O. Diener 
[D] Joseph L. Goldstein 
Answer: A [Hargobind Khorana] 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 92 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
91 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
76. Which among the following is a main component of some alert tablets such as Alert, No 
Doz, Stay Awake & Vivarin? 
[A] Thein 
[B] Caffeine 
[C] Nicotine 
[D] catechins 
Answer: B [Caffeine] 
 
77. Which among the following compound of barium is used as radio contrast agent for X-ray 
imaging and other diagnostic procedures and also commonly called as Barium Food? 
[A] Barium Carbonate 
[B] Barium Sulphate 
[C] Barium Bromide 
[D] Barium hydroxide 
Answer: B [Barium Sulphate] 
 
78. Which among the following is used as an antidote? 
[A] Paracetamol 
[B] Nicotine 
[C] Thiamine 
[D] Activated Charcoal 
Answer: D [Activated Charcoal] 
 
79. Which among the following will undergo a chemical reaction depending on the pH of the 
solution? 
[A] Calcium Oxide 
[B] Zinc Oxide 
[C] Ferric Oxide 
[D] Ferrous Oxide 
 
80. Which among the following will undergo a chemical reaction depending on the pH of the 
solution? 
[A] Calcium Oxide 
[B] Zinc Oxide 
[C] Ferric Oxide 
[D] Ferrous Oxide 
Answer: B [Zinc Oxide] 
 
81. Bring out the statement which is wrong: 
[A] Acetone is used as a solvent 
[B] Adrenaline is used in the event of heart failure 
[C] graphite is an example of allotropy 
[D] All are correct 
Answer: D [All are correct] 
 
 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 93 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
92 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
82. Which among the following basic atoms are must in an Alkaloid? 
[A] Sodium 
[B] Nitrogen 
[C] Magnesium 
[D] Potassium 
Answer: B [Nitrogen] 
 
83. F block elements in the periodic table which are commonly called Lanthanides have the 
following atomic numbers: 
[A] 57-70 
[B] 58-71 
[C] 59-72 
[D] 58-70 
Answer: B [58-71] 
 
84. The volume of a gas at a given pressure and temperature is proportional to the number of 
atoms or molecules regardless of the nature of the gas. This concept is called as___? 
[A] Avogadro‘s law 
[B] Dalton‘s law 
[C] Henry‘s law 
[D] Ideal gas law 
Answer: A [Avogadro’s law] 
 
85. Who among the following is known to manufacture first Cyclotron? 
[A] Ernest Lawrence 
[B] Niels Bohr 
[C] Rutherford 
[D] Max Born 
Answer: A [Ernest Lawrence] 
 
86. British Scientist JJ Thomson was awarded Nobel prize in Physics in 1906 for discovery of 
which of the following particle? 
[A] Electron 
[B] Proton 
[C] Neutron 
[D] Radio activity 
Answer: A [Electron] 
 
87. Charles Goodyear is known for which of the following? 
[A] Experiments on Rubber Plants 
[B] Vulcanization of Rubber 
[C] Invention of Radial Tyres 
[D] Invention of Artificial Rubber 
Answer: B [Vulcanization of Rubber] 
 
 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 94 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
93 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
88. Which among the following gas is used in Balloons? 
[A] Hydrogen 
[B] Helium 
[C] Nitrogen 
[D] Oxygen 
Answer: B [Helium] 
 
89. Which among the following is the most important characteristic of Noble metals? 
[A] Luster 
[B] Non reactive nature 
[C] Preciousness 
[D] Rare availability 
Answer: B [Non reactive nature] 
 
90. Which among the following is correct regarding the alkaline battery? 
[A] Negative terminal made of Zinc Powder and Positive terminal made of Manganese dioxide 
& electrolyte is KOH 
[B] Negative terminal made of Manganese dioxide and Positive terminal made of Zinc powder 
& electrolyte KOH 
[C] Negative terminal made of Zinc Powder and Positive terminal made of Manganese dioxide 
& Electrolyte is Ammonium Chloride 
[D] Negative terminal made of Manganese dioxide and Positive terminal made of Zinc powder 
& electrolyte Ammonium Chloride 
Answer: A [Negative terminal made of Zinc Powder and Positive terminal made of 
Manganese dioxide & electrolyte is KOH] 
 
91. What is the atomic number of Transuranic elements? 
[A] Greater than 90 
[B] Greater than 92 
[C] Greater than 91 
[D] Greater than 93 
Correct Answer: B [Greater than 92] 
 
92. A Cyclotron is ___? 
[A] A charged particle 
[B] A particle Accelerator 
[C] A magnetic particle 
[D] A radioactive particle 
Answer: B [A particle Accelerator] 
 
93. Steel is an alloy consisting mostly of iron, with a carbon content between 0.2% and 2.1% by 
weight. An increasing amount of Iron will result in which of the following? 
[A] Increase Hardening 
[B] Decrease Hardening 
[C] Increase ductility 
[D] Increase melting Point 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 95 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
94 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
Answer: A [Increase Hardening] 
 
94. Cassiterite is an ore of which of the following ? 
[A] Iron 
[B] Zinc 
[C] Copper 
[D] Tin 
Answer: D [Tin]- Cassiterite is SnO2 or Tin Oxide 
 
95. Which of the following are found in nucleus of Deuterium  
[A] 1 proton & 1 neutron 
[B] 2 protons 
[C] 1 proton and 1 electron 
[D] 2 neutrons only 
Answer: A [1 proton & 1 neutron] 
 
96. Which among the following provides the centripetal force to an electron circulating around 
the nucleus? 
[A] electrostatic forces of repulsion 
[B] electrostatic force of attraction 
[C] speed of the electron 
[D] nuclear charge 
Answer: B [electrostatic force of attraction] 
 
97. Which among the following of a catalyst does not change at the end of a reaction? 
[A] Quantity 
[B] Chemical Composition 
[C] Both Quantity and Chemical com position 
[D] None of the above 
Answer: C [Both Quantity and Chemical com position] 
 
98. The noble gases are a group of chemical elements with very similar properties: under 
standard conditions, they are all odorless, colorless, monatomic gases, with a very low 
chemical reactivity. How many Noble gases occur naturally? 
[A] 5 
[B] 6 
[C] 7 
[D] 8 
Answer: B [6]- The six noble gases that occur naturally are helium (He), neon (Ne), argon 
(Ar), krypton (Kr), xenon (Xe), and the radioactive radon (Rn). 
 
99. Hard Water contains which of the following? 
[A] Aluminum 
[B] Chlorine 
[C] Calcium 
[D] Zinc 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 96 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
95 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
Answer: C [Calcium]- Hard water is generally found in areas where groundwater is in contact 
with limestone, chalk and dolomite and gets higher amount of calcium and magnesium 
dissolved in it. 
 
100. Which among the following is an ionic solid? 
[A] Diamond 
[B] Dry ice 
[C] Table salt 
[D] All are ionic solids 
Answer: C [Table salt]- One important character of Ionic solids is that they readily get 
dissolved in water 
 
101. Which among the following statements about Ozone is INCORRECT? 
[A] It is found in the upper atmosphere filters potentially damaging ultraviolet light from reaching 
the Earth‘s surface 
[B] It is lighter than oxygen that is why it is found in the upper atmosphere 
[C] It is an allotrope of oxygen 
[D] All are correct 
Answer: B [It is lighter than oxygen that is why it is found in the upper atmosphere]- 
Ozone is heavier than oxygen yet is found in upper atmosphere, 
 
102. Which among the following is correct ? 
[A] Oxidation takes place at Cathode and Reduction Takes Place at Anode 
[B] Oxidation takes place at Anode and Reduction Takes place at Cathode 
[C] Both Oxidation and Reduction takes place at cathode 
[D] Both Oxidation and Reduction takes place at Anode 
Answer: B [Oxidation takes place at Anode and Reduction Takes place at Cathode]- In 
an electrochemical cell, the half cell where oxidation takes place is known as oxidation half cell 
and the half cell where reduction takes place is known as reduction half cell. Oxidation takes 
place at anode which is negatively charged and reduction takes place at cathode which is 
positively charged. 
 
103. The atomic weight of Chlorine is 35. It consists of _______? 
[A] 17 Protons + 18 Neutrons 
[B] 17 Neutrons + 18 protons 
[C] 17 Neutrons + 17 Protons + 1 electron 
[D] None of the above 
Answer: A [17 Protons + 18 Neutrons] 
 
104. When we buy a Jewellery of 22 carat Gold , this means that we are getting a purity of gold 
with ______? 
[A] 90% 
[B] 91.67% 
[C] 95.5% 
[D] 98% 
Answer: B [91.67%] 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 97 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
96 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
105. An Jewellery was left exposed to the atmosphere for some time and it becomes coated 
with green carbonate. The Jewellery is made up of which of the following? 
[A] Copper 
[B] Silver 
[C] Zinc 
[D] Gold 
Answer: A [Copper] 
 
106. The process of purifying water by spraying water on to a bed of stones where 
microorganism live so that the microorganisms feed on the pathogens in water and make the 
water free from harmful pathogens is called? 
[A] Stone bed method 
[B] biofilter method 
[C] aerobic filtration 
[D] anerobic filtration 
Answer: B [biofilter method] 
 
107. As per Avogadro‘s hypothesis , equal volumes of different gases at the same temperature 
and pressure contain equal number of ______? 
[A] Atoms 
[B] Molecules 
[C] Particles 
[D] Electrons 
Answer: B [Molecules] 
 
108. Duralumin which is used in making aero planes is an alloy consisting of _____? 
[A] Aluminum & Copper 
[B] Aluminum, Copper & Manganese 
[C] Aluminum, Copper, Manganese & Magnesium 
[D] Aluminum and zinc 
Answer: C [Aluminum, Copper, Manganese & Magnesium] 
 
109. Which among the following was the first artificially produced element? 
[A] Neptunium 
[B] Ununbium 
[C] Technetium 
[D] none of the above 
Answer: C [Technetium] 
 
110. Froth & Foams are examples of which of the following ? 
[A] solid suspended in gas 
[B] liquid suspended in gas 
[C] gas suspended in liquid 
[D] gas suspended in solid 
Answer: C [gas suspended in liquid] 
 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 98 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
97 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
111. Froth & Foams are examples of which of the following ? 
[A] solid suspended in gas 
[B] liquid suspended in gas 
[C] gas suspended in liquid 
[D] gas suspended in solid 
Answer: C [gas suspended in liquid] 
112. Which among the following is most electronegative element? 
[A] Chlorine 
[B] FLourine 
[C] Bromine 
[D] All of them have same electronegativity 
Answer: B [FLourine]- Electronegativity is an atoms relative ability to remove an electron pair 
in the formation of a covalent bond. I.e. an atoms ability to steal a pair of electrons from the 
outer ring of another atom to make a covalent bond, (like a contract to share electons in order 
to fill there outer shells and become stable) 
Across the periodic table (left to right) this gets harder to do due to an increase in attraction 
forces between the nuclear charge and the outer electons. Therefore across the periodic table 
‗more‘ electronegativity energy is required to remove those electrons. 
Down the periodic table, from top to bottom attraction forces between the electrons in the outer 
shell and the central nuclear charge decreases (shielding effect of sub levels and increased 
atomic radius), this make it easier for the electrons to be stolen, so there is less 
electronegativity required. 
Fluorine is the highest and furthest to the right, making it the most electronegative. 
(Helium and Neon etc have full outer shells so arent involved in covalent bonds) 
 
113. What is the main use of Bisphenol A drug ? 
[A] A drug which was used by sports persons for doping 
[B] A chemical compound which is used in plastics used for food packaging 
[C] An alloy which is used in cans of cola drinks 
[D] None of the above 
Answer: B [A chemical compound which is used in plastics used for food packaging] 
 
114. Which among the following is not a constituent of gobar gas? 
[A] Methane 
[B] Propane 
[C] Carbondioxide 
[D] All are constiuents of Gobar gas 
Answer: B [Propane] 
 
115. Which among the following is incorrect regarding the chemical nature of Diamond & 
Graphite? 
[A] Density of Diamond is higher than that of Graphite 
[B] Diamond is chemically unreactive while graphite is mild reactive 
[C] Both Diamond and Graphite are good conductors of electricity 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 99 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
98 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
[D] None of the above 
Answer: C [Both Diamond and Graphite are good conductors of electricity]- Diamond is 
bad conductor of electrcity 
 
116. Galvanizing is a metallurgical process that is used to coat steel or iron with which of the 
following? 
[A] Zinc 
[B] Lead 
[C] Chromium 
[D] Copper 
Answer: A [Zinc]- Galvanisation is a method of protecting steel and iron from rusting by 
coating them with a thin layer of zinc 
 
117. Which among the following is Quick Silver? 
[A] Aluminium 
[B] Mercury 
[C] Lead 
[D] Zinc 
Answer: B [Mercury] 
 
118. The primary part of Liquefied Petroleum Gas LPG is ______? 
[A] Butance 
[B] Methane 
[C] Propane 
[D] Ethane 
Answer: C [Propane] 
 
119. Which among the following explains the radiation emitted by black bodies? 
[A] Big-bang theory 
[B] Quantum Theory 
[C] Piezoelectric Effect 
[D] None of the above 
Answer: B [Quantum Theory] 
 
120. Mustard gas which is a cytotoxic, vesicant chemical warfare agents with the ability to form 
large blisters on exposed skin contains which of the following elements? 
[A] Sulphur 
[B] Bromine 
[C] Chlorine 
[D] Magnesium 
 
121. Calamine lotion which is used as an antipruritic (anti-itching agent) to treat mild pruritic 
conditions contains which of the following? 
[A] Zinc 
[B] Calcium 
[C] Magnesium 
shop.ssbcrack.com

--- Page 100 ---
shop.ssbcrack.com
MCQs                                                                             GENERAL SCIENCE                                                                     MCQs 
99 | P a g e                                                           shop.ssbcrack.com         
[D] Sodium 
Answer: A [Zinc] 
 
122. In which of the following Mercury is a constituent? 
[A] Cinnabar 
[B] Chile saltpeter 
[C] Calamine 
[D] Gold 
Answer: A [Cinnabar] 
 
123. Adsorption is used commonly in which of the following processes? 
[A] Purification of solids 
[B] Purification of liquids 
[C] Making scrubbers 
[D] Chromatography 
Answer: D [Chromatography] 
 
124. Which among the following is a correct definition of Cyclotron? 
[A] Accelerator of charged atomic particles 
[B] Device for detection of High Energy atomic radiation 
[C] Device for storing electric charge 
[D] Device for storing heat 
Answer: A [Accelerator of charged atomic particles] 
 
125. The Chemical formula of Graphite is _________? 
[A] C 
[B] C2 
[C] C4 
[D] C6 
Answer: A [C] 
 
126. Which among the following is true about solubility of ―Lipids‖? 
[A] They are soluble in water but insoluble in organic solvents 
[B] They are insoluble in water but soluble in organic solvents 
[C] They are soluble in water as well as organic solvents 
[D] They are insoluble in water as well as organic solvents 
Answer: B [They are insoluble in water but soluble in organic solvents] 
 
127. Calcium Magnesium Silicate is commonly called as ________? 
[A] Asbestos 
[B] Borax 
[C] Baking Soda 
[D] Washing Soda 
Answer: A [Asbestos] 
 
 
shop.ssbcrack.com
